===== [출처 강의: 06_IaC_코드형인프라_입문] =====
## 영상 1: Terraform explained in 15 mins | Terraform Tutorial for Beginners
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l5k1ai_GBDE
채널: TechWorld with Nana
자막 언어: English (자동 생성)

in this video we're gonna talk about terraform first I'm gonna explain to you what terraform is and what it's used for then we will see what is the difference between terraform and in Zabul and when to use each we will also look at the terraform architecture and commend as well as an example terraform configuration file after which you will have a good overview and understanding of how terraform actually works and how it does its job so first of all what is terraform terraform allows you to automate and manage your infrastructure and your platform and services that run on that infrastructure it's open source and it uses the clarity of language meaning you don't have to define every step of how these automation and management isn't done you just clear what you want the final result or end result and terraform will figure out how to execute it versus imperative style where you specify how to execute each step so as I said terraform is a tool for infrastructure provisioning so what does it mean exactly let's say you just started a project where you create some application and you want to set up an infrastructure from scratch where this application will run how does your infrastructure look like let's say you want to spin up several servers where you will deploy your five micro service applications that make up your application as docker containers and also you are going to deploy a database container you decide to use AWS platform to build your whole infrastructure on so first step will be to go to AWS and prepare the setup so the applications can be deployed there this means you create your private network space you create an employee server in situ server instances you install docker on each one of those plus any other tools that you might need for your application you set up security on your servers like firewalls you set up network etc once the infrastructure is prepared you can now deploy your docker applications or docker containers on that prepared infrastructure so as you see these are two different tasks or two separate steps of creating the whole setup one is provisioning the infrastructure preparing everything so the application can be deployed the second one is actually deploying the applications on it so you might even have two separate teams or two individuals who do these two separate tasks so a possible scenario DevOps team member configures the infrastructure and a developer then deploys the applications on the prepared infrastructure so where does terraform come into this whole thing terraform is used for the first part where you provision the infrastructure to prepare it for the application deployment creating the EPC spinning up the servers creating the security the AWS user with its permissions may be installing docker specific version on servers etc and obviously all of this needs to be done in a correct order because one task may be depends on the other now here I must mention something that a lot of people ask when it comes to terraform and that is what is a difference between ends bowl and terraform because they seem to be doing the same thing especially if you read the official definitions or official documentation they're sound like the same tools so the question is pretty logical what is the difference between them and which one should I use for my project so let's say the similarities and differences between these two using our example setup first of all terraform and in Siebel are both infrastructure as a code meaning they're both used to automate provisioning configuring and managing the infrastructure however terraform is mainly infrastructure provisioning tool that's where its main power lies but it also has possibilities to deploy applications in other tools on that infrastructure in Siebel on the other hand is mainly a configuration tool so once the infrastructure is provision and is it's there in Siebel can now be used to configure it and deploy applications install and update software on that infrastructure etc so as you see there overlaps of what each tool does and this creates the confusion other differences to consider in terms of those overlaps are in Siebel is more mature and terraform is relatively new and because of that is also changing dynamically and terraform is more much more advanced in orchestration so to summarize the difference terraform is a better tool for provisioning infrastructure and in Siebel is a better tool for configuring that infrastructure deploying installing applications and services on them so it's a common practice where DevOps engineers use the combination of these tools to cover the whole set up into end using both for their own strengths instead of just using one tool now if you want to learn more about in scible as well I have on video that I made about it where I explain exactly what ends bullies and how to use it so you can check it out and I also create another video where I will compare the infrastructure is a code tools like in Siebel chef terraform CloudFormation etc in more detail and also explain why each is best in one area even though they can do other tasks as well so if you want to see those videos and if you want to learn more then you can subscribe to my channel you can click the notification bell and stay tuned for the upcoming videos as well so now let's go back to our use case where we created the infrastructure using terraform and on AWS provision successfully for your project and you deployed the application on it now we decide that you want to add five more servers to the existing infrastructure to deploy more micro services because your team develops some more features and they need to be deployed and you also want to add some security configuration or maybe remove some stuff that you configure at the beginning so now we are in the phase of managing the existing infrastructure adding some stuff reconfiguring removing some stuff etc and using terraform you can make such adjustments to infrastructure pretty easily and this task of managing the infrastructure is just as important because once you've created the initial infrastructure for your project you will be continually adjusting and changing it and because of that you also need some automation tool that will do most of the heavy lifting for you so that you don't have to manually configure and do some stuff so once you are set up with terraform to create and change or maintain your infrastructure another useful thing or a common use case could be replicating that infrastructure let's say after you have tested this setup and everything works fine you decide now you want to release your application in production environments so you want to create a production environment that replicates this exact setup and keep the first as a development environment where you can test new features new micro services and updates before you launch it into production again you can use terraform here to automate that process so you can easily spin up an identical infrastructure and setup using the same tariffs run code that you use for the first setup the development environment setup and you can do the same to speed up at identical staging server as well so that makes these tasks also very easy so how does terraform do all this how does their firm actually connect to this infrastructure provider platforms and use all these technologies to provision stuff so for example how does terraform connect to AWS to create virtual space start ec2 instances configure networking etc in order to do the job terraform has two main components that make up its architecture the first one is telephones core and the core uses two input sources in order to do its job so we take cell phone figuration that you as a user right and where you defined what needs to be created or provisioned and the second one is there from state where Terra firme keeps the up-to-date state of how the current set up of the infrastructure looks like so what core then does is it takes this input and it figures out the plan of what needs to be done so it compares the state what is the current state what is the configuration that you desire the end result as I mentioned at the beginning and compares that and when it sees there is a difference so you want something else than what the current state is it figures out what needs to be done to get to that desired state in the configuration file so what needs to be created what needs to be updated deleted in which order on that infrastructure setup and the second component or the second part of the architecture are providers for specific technologies this could be cloud providers like AWS measurer or other infrastructure as a service platforms so for the infrastructure level tasks but terraform as I mentioned is also providers for more high-level components like kubernetes or other platform as-a-service tools even some software is a self-service tool so it gives you possibility to create stuff on different levels like create a AWS infrastructure then deploy or create kubernetes on top of it and then create services inside that or components inside that kubernetes cluster so it gives you all these possibilities and it does that through those providers terraform has over hundred providers for these different technologies and each provider then gives terraform user access to its resources so through AWS provider for example you have access to hundreds of AWS resources like it's two instances the AWS users etc with kubernetes provider you access to commodities resources like services and deployments and namespaces etc so this is how this works and this way terraform tries to help you provision and cover the complete application setup from infrastructure all the way to the application and this is your convenient but as I mentioned in the comparison between terraform and ansible Tara forms strength is actually in the infrastructure provisioning and for the other stuff you can use ansible or similar tools so once the core creates an execution plan based on the input from config file and state it then uses providers for specific technologies to execute the plane to connect to those platforms and to actually carry out those execution steps so now to also have an idea of how terraform configuration file looks like this is an example where you see AWS provider is configured and through the provider you now have two AWS resource like VPC you can create that with some attributes the same way you have the kubernetes provider here configured and through that now you can create a Cabrini's namespace resource where you pass some attributes and the syntax is very intuitive I would say basically define what she wants you want a resource of a certain technology or certain provider created and then you define its attributes and that's what terraform will create or do for you now one thing I mentioned the beginning and I want to go into detail is the declarative approach that Tara forms configuration files are written in and this is important to understand so what does declarative mean exactly when you create a terraform file instead of defining what steps to be executed to create a BBC or to spin up five ec2 instances or create the network configuration you define the end state you desire so you say I want five servers with network configuration like this and I one AWS user that has these permissions to access all the servers terraform go do that for me so instead of defining exactly what to do which is an imperative approach you define what the end result should be a declarative approach now for the initial setup this may not make much difference so when is the configuration of imperative and declarative approach it might actually look pretty similar but consider when you're updating your infrastructure like removing a server or adding another server or making other adjustments with imperative approach you would say in a configuration file remove two servers add a firewall configuration add some permissions to the AWS user etc so you give instructions of what to do with the clarity of approach like in terraform example you would say my new desired state is now seven servers this firewall configuration and user with this set of permissions do whatever needs to be done to get from the current state to the new desired state so now you don't have to actually calculate and decide how many service needs to be edie you say I want seven servers at the end that's what I want or you don't need to calculate and figure out how many permissions or which permissions you should add you just say I want this set of permissions to come out at the end so with the declarative approach if you just adjust the old configuration file and re execute it instead of adding the new set of instructions this is obviously very comfortable because your configuration files stays clean and small but also you always know what the current setup is just by looking at the configuration file because that's always the end result whereas in the first approach an imperative you have to somehow add this up and figure out the Delta between all the changes applied by multiple instructions so you've created the terraform file configuration file that defines your desired infrastructure set up on AWS now how do you make terraform take action terraform has commence you can execute to go through different stages which is pretty clear and straightforward the first command is refresh with this command terraform will query the infrastructure provider in our case AWS to get the up-to-date state so terraform will now know what is the current state of the infrastructure the next command is plenn remember i said the core is responsible for taking current state in your configuration file is input and decide based on the difference what needs to be done that's the plan so what terraform needs to do in order to achieve that desired state that you defined in a terraform configuration file if it's an initial setup it figures out all the steps to create the desired setup if it's an update it compares the existing setup with a new desired state and figures out what changes and adjustments need to be made in which order to create a new desired State for example at a new server and a new permission etc now this is just a plan this is where the core kind of constructs the the plain logically or what needs to be done the next command is the command where the actual execution happens and that's the apply command so we'd apply you can execute the plan so plan command is like a preview of what's gonna happen if you execute apply obviously terraform in the background will do the refresh at the up-to-date state then create the plan and then apply it which means if you want to execute a configuration file you can just execute the apply command and it will do all this and another command is destroy which obviously destroys the whole setup removing elements one by one in the right order and cleaning up all the resources that were created basically reverting everything that has been created and this could be used if let's say you create an environment for an important demo day and you didn't want to interfere with the existing environments once the demo is over you can destroy the whole setup destroy like apply will also check what's currently running and then create a plan of what needs to be removed in which order so I hope this gives you a good high level overview of terraform and how it works if you want to learn more such stuff then subscribe to my channel and stay tuned for more videos like this thanks for watching and see you in the next video

---

## 영상 2: What is Infrastructure as Code?
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zWw2wuiKd5o
채널: IBM Technology
자막 언어: English (수동)

Hi everyone, my name is Sai Vennam and I'm with the IBM Cloud team. Today, let's talk about Infrastructure as Code. These days it's increasingly crucial to automate your infrastructure as applications can be deployed into production up to hundreds of times per day. In addition, infrastructure is fleeting and can be provisioned or deprovisioned in response to load. Let's start with an example. Let's say you're building out an application and you've chosen a public cloud. Now, the first thing you've decided to do is build your application on Kubernetes. So, we'll have a Kubernetes application stack. Now we don't actually have to dive deeper into Kubernetes because it isolates the hardware from the application layer. So, we don't actually have to go in deeper, it will manage that for us. Next, let's say that after a week of development we've decided to bring in a VM that holds a legacy application that we have not modernized just yet. So, we'll bring on a VM and now to actually connect up those dots we'll need a VPC (Virtual Private Cloud). So, there we go, we have a basic infrastructure in place. Now, let's say that I've developed this, it's great, all the infrastructure details are documented. Now I'm ready to move it into a test phase. Now, I know that for best practice what I should do is create a whole new environment that mimics my development environment. To do so, I'll go back to my documentation and start following the steps to spin up that infrastructure. But let's say that maybe I forgot to document one of the config switches that I've changed, or maybe the platform is different in how it handles provisioning infrastructure. Regardless, the application and test don't work the same way in the new environment. I decide, "OK, we need to fix this problem" - and to never have this problem in the future again, we need to take advantage of infrastructure as code. Let's talk about the first approach to infrastructure automation, it's going to be imperative. Now, this is kind of intuitive for most people because an imperative approach allows you to define step-by-step how to get your infrastructure into a certain state. So, in general an imperative approach would use something like a CLI along with maybe a bash script. So, for example, in this case we could do something like, "cli create k8s", and then we would define some additional commands to customize that Kubernetes deployment. We'll do the same thing for the VM, as well as the VPC. So, an imperative approach has an advantage. It allows you to really define step-by-step of how your infrastructure is provisioned and that generally comes with more power as well because you're using the cloud tools and doing it in a step-by-step process. But at the same time, this can come with complexity. For example, if you wanted to tear down your VMs, or your environments rather, or let's say you wanted to scale it up or down, you'd have to write custom scripts. It's not handled for you in an imperative approach, so this generally doesn't scale well. Another approach to Infrastructure Automation is going to be Declarative, and this is actually my favorite approach. Now, a declarative approach would be something like Terraform and what it basically allows you to do is to define the final state of your infrastructure and then it lets the provider handle the rest. So, instead of defining every step, you just define the final state. So, in this example maybe you would do something like define a Kubernetes resource and a VM resource, as well as a VPC resource. Another great thing about this is it's generally managed through just simple config maps. So, if you wanted to do something like define a host you could do that, maybe a domain, or maybe even the subnets. So, in general a declarative approach allows you to more easily manage the configuration and is my preferred approach for automating infrastructure. Let's take this simple example, if you ran the imperative script multiple times you would actually end up with a multiple environments and, in addition, let's say one of the steps halfway through failed then you would have to add error handling to tear down the steps that did succeed. Now with the declarative approach, no matter how many times you run the script, you end up with the exact same infrastructure. So, you could do it the first time, provision your environment, and then maybe run it again later on to ensure that your environment hasn't changed. So, I'd say this is very important to can understand the different approaches infrastructure as code, but, in general, I do prefer a declarative approach. Next let's talk about DevOps. Now we all understand how important about DevOps is. When developing an application, you'll first write some code, you'll want test that it actually works, and then you want to push it into production. And then you want to make sure that all of that is always working and you can repeat those processes. Now, I know there are teams out there that have a perfect agile DevOps flow, but because they're working with legacy infrastructure they have to open a ticket every time they want to get a new VM, and that's just due to the infrastructure that they're running on. Now, that really holds them back. Now, with Infrastructure as Code, when it's supported, it allows you to treat your infrastructure with the same level of quality that you treat your code. So, this includes things like versioning. So, essentially, you want to make sure that any time infrastructure changes, you're tracking that, and is generally a best approach for automation. The last thing I want to talk about is immutable vs mutable infrastructure. Now, breaking that down: an immutable infrastructure is one that can't be changed, it can't be mutated. Now, at first impression, that might sound like a bad thing, but let's break this down by seeing an example with a mutable approach to infrastructure architecture. So, we have our example here, and let's say that we're building out the app and we decide we need a database. So, to do so, we'll run a script in our development environment. This brings up that database within our VPC. Now all of this is working great, so we say, "Hey, let's just run that script across all of the environments that we have." Now, let's say that 99% of the time that works fine, but some of the times it fails, and you're in a weird limbo state. So, let's break that down. So, we're going from version one to version two. Now, we have infrastructure code in place to bring up version one, but now we ran this custom script to move it from version one to version two. What we essentially have right now is something called "configuration drift", or "environment drift". Our existing environment is no longer matching what we have in our automation. Now, the problem is: to help debug those problem situations you would have to wipe out the entire environment and then redeploy version one and then run those scripts. Now, that might seem OK the first couple of times you do it, but when moving to scale it becomes incredibly hard to maintain. So, with an immutable approach to infrastructure and infrastructure automation, every time you want to make a change to the infrastructure you bring up a brand new environment alongside the old one and then, once you verify that they're both working, you can bring down the older version. Now, it's a little expensive because you can imagine that you're running both environments at the same time, but, in general, it's the best practice to ensure that your infrastructure can move to scale. Thanks for joining me for this quick overview of infrastructure as code. If you want to learn more about this, or DevOps check out the link below. Remember you can always get started with a free account on IBM Cloud. Thank you.

---

주의: 세 번째 영상(POPP2WTJ8es "What is Infrastructure as Code? Difference of Infrastructure as Code Tools")은 YouTube API 레이트 리미팅(HTTP 429)으로 인해 자막 추출에 실패했습니다. 여러 번의 재시도와 대기에도 불구하고 해결되지 않았습니다.

===== [출처 강의: 07_모니터링과_관측성_입문] =====
## 영상 1: Observability vs APM vs Monitoring (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CAQ_a2-9UOI)

These days I hear the terms Observability, Monitoring, and APM, or Application Performance Management thrown around seemingly interchangeably, but these terms actually mean quite different things. So let's dive in head first and see an example of how exactly these things differ. So to start I'm going to start with kind of a Java EE application, it's kind of old school, we'll go back you know maybe a decade. And let's say that we've got some components in this Java EE app that actually power it. So something important to remember here although we might be using a SOA, or service oriented architecture, this is not exactly microservices. So they're not communicating over Rest APIs. So you have some inherent advantages here, for example you can take advantage of like the framework the Java EE framework to output log files which will probably all come out into the same directory and the timestamps match up so things are good. In addition, you could take advantage of something like an APM solution which is kind of like a one size fits all set and forget so you install it and it'll kind of get rich analytics and data and metrics about the running services within the application. So essentially what we've done is we've made our system observable so that you know our Ops teams were then able to kind of look into it and identify problems and figure out you know if anything needed to be done. So for the business objectives back then this was essentially good enough, but this tends to fall apart very quickly when you start to move to a more cloud native approach where you have multiple run times and multiple kind of layers to the architecture.

So let's say we have an example app here. So we'll say we'll start with node as a front end. Let's say we also have a Java backend application. And then finally let's say we also have a Python app which is doing some data processing. So let's see how these things work with each other so the front-end app probably talks to the Java app and also the Python app for some data processing. The Java app probably communicates with a database and then the Python app probably talks to the Java app for kind of crud operations. So this is kind of my quick sketch, kind of a dummy layout for a microservices based application. You can take it a step further and even say that this is all running within Kubernetes. So we've got these container-based applications running in a cluster. So immediately the first problem I can see here is that with multiple runtimes we now have to think about multiple different agents or ways to collect data. So instead of just one APM tool we might have to start thinking about pulling in multiple so how would we con consolidate all that data right so that's a challenge. In addition, let's think about things like logging. So each of these runtimes probably outputting logs in a different place, and you know, we have to figure out how we consolidate all those. Maybe we use a log streaming service. Regardless you can see the complexity starts to grow. And finally, as you add more services and microservices components to this architecture, say a user comes in where try to actually access one of these services and they run into an error you need to trace that request through the multiple services. Well unless you have the right architecture infrastructure in place, you know something like headers on requests, maybe a way to handle web sockets, things are going to start to get messy and you can see how the technical complexity grows quite large. So here's where Observability comes in and actually differs, and differs itself from kind of standard APM tools. It thinks about the more holistic cloud cloud-native approach for being able to do things like logging and monitoring and that kind of thing. So I'll say there's three major steps for any sort of Observability solution. We'll start with the first one we'll call it collect, because we need to collect data. Then we'll go to monitor, and we'll talk about this because this is you know part of monitoring. And finally we'll end with analyze, kind of doing something with the actual data that you have so with the collect step, you know first thing let's say that we actually made our system observable. So the great thing is with Kubernetes you get some CPU memory data automatically. So let's say we get some of that, we get some logs from the application all streaming to the same location and let's say we even get some other stuff like high availability numbers or average latency, you know things that we want to be able to track and monitor. So that brings me to my next step. So once we have this data available we need to be able to actually do something with it, at least visualizing it maybe if we're not actually even solving problems yet what do we do with this data. Well maybe we create some dashboards to be able to monitor the health of our application, and say we create multiple dashboards to be able to track different services or kind of different business objectives, high availability versus latency, that kind of thing. Now the final thing that I want to talk about here is what do we do next. So say we found some bug in the application by kind of looking at our monitoring dashboards and we need to dive in deeper and fix the problem with the node app. Well the great thing about that is an Observability solution should allow you to do just that, it allows you to actually take it even a step further because these days with Kubernetes you're getting a lot of that information from the Kubernetes layer. So this is something I want to quickly pause and talk about. so with APM tools in the past they were really kind of focused on kind of like resource constraints, CPU usage, memory usage, that kind of thing. These days that's been offloaded to the Kubernetes layer, so you know Observability kind of took APM and evolved it to the next stage, pulled it a step up and enables our users to focus on things like SLOs and SLIs, Service Level Objectives and Service Level Indicators. So these will enable you to actually focus on things that matter to your business. So things like making sure that latencies are low or that application uptime is high. So I think that's kind of the crucial three steps for any sort of observability solution. Let's take a step back again. These things can be hard to set up on your own with open source projects and capabilities pulling all the different things together, so you might be looking at an Enterprise Observability Solution and so when you're comparing competitors and looking at building out your enterprise observability capability I would look at kind of three main things. Now let's start with automation. Now every step of the way we need to make sure that automation is there to make things easier so let's say that our dev team pushes out a new version of the node app and go from v1 to v2. Now let's say they inadvertently introduced a bug. Instead of making a bulk API call they now make individual API calls to the Python app. So in our monitoring dashboard our Ops team's like oh guys something's wrong, the DB app is getting a lot of requests what's going on? Well you need to be able to kind of automatically go back and trace through the requests and identify what happened. That actually brings me to my second point as well, which is context. It's always important, I can spell, to have that context. So automation is important here because when upgrading to the new version a node you want to make sure that the right agent is automatically installed and kind of the instrumentation is in place so your dev team doesn't quite have to do that, and as new services get added you want your monitoring dashboards to be automatically updated as well. And that context is extremely crucial as with this example we needed to be able to trace that request back to the source of the problem. So once we've traced that request back to the source with that context that we have the third step here and I think probably one of the most important is action. What do we actually do now? And that brings me to my last step here the analyze phase, which remember we talked about was kind of an evolution of traditional APM tools to kind of the the way that Observability tools implement that today. So when you get to this step you'll probably want to look at maybe the SLIs within the node app. Maybe dive in deeper, right. So maybe you look in and you identify that you need to look at application trace logs. So you look in the trace logs and you identify some problems and you figure out what the what the fix is you tell it to your dev team you know maybe the last step here is fix and then rinse and repeat for any other issues that might come up in the future. So I think Enterprise Observability is extremely crucial here when we're kind of looking at the bigger picture because it's not just about having the individual pieces, which again like I said might be quite hard to set up with purely open source approaches, but you want to think about automation to make sure things are kind of set up seamlessly to reduce the overhead on your side. make sure you have context to be able to see how services work with each other maybe even generate things like dependency graphs to see the broader view because you might not always have a light board like this to see the architecture so cleanly. And finally being able to take action when you do find a problem. So making sure that your Observability solution has a way to automatically pull together data from multiple sources, multiple services, and then figure out what's valid and necessary for you to be able to make that fix happen. So IBM is invested in making sure our clients can effectively set up Enterprise Observability with the recent acquisition of Instanta. To learn more about the acquisition, or to get a showcase of the capabilities be sure to check out the links in the description below. As always thanks for watching our videos. If you liked the video or have any questions or comments, be sure to drop a like and a question or comment below. Be sure to subscribe and stay tuned for more videos like this in the future. Thank you.


## 영상 2: Observability: Metrics, Logging, Tracing, Oh My! (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZVKrN1RLetI)

hello everyone my name is Joe Ellis II know I'm an account executive with CCSI and I'd like to thank everyone for attending today's observability webinar today our practice manager Joe Goldberg will be presenting and for those of you not familiar with si si si we've been in business since 1974 and our core competencies include infrastructure which incorporates data center IP t wireless disaster recovery and security real-time breach detection risk assessments penn and vulnerability testing DDoS solutions secure mail and endpoint protection also on the cloud side we provide services around migration to the cloud backup disaster recovery and cost containment for those customers already in the cloud we also provide application monitoring solutions which we'll be talking at great length today we're a managed service provider and a managed security service provider and we also provide third-party hardware maintenance break fix feet on the street services for any questions during today's call please place them in our WebEx chat and now I'd like to take this opportunity and introduce you to Joe Goldberg of CCSI thanks Joe I really appreciate it today we're gonna be talking about monitoring and observability and kind of what's the difference and why does it matter observability being kind of a new term in the industry so it's a Leslie Lamport once that a distributed system is one in which the failure of a computer you didn't even know existed can render your own computer unusable that becomes more and more true with services become more and more diverse and people move to the cloud and micro services etc things that you didn't even know we're there can destroy your service crucial monitoring was designed to monitor a server so you had things like Nagios or maybe just SSH into the boxes to take a look or used something like app dynamics but we're still looking at either a cific bare-metal server or a virtual machine and it was easy you had an agent or you remote it into the machine and you took a look at what was going on inside yeah checked it against a threshold and you alerted if the threshold was but was violated but in today's environment how do you monitor things like kubernetes AWS Farag a Azure functions which is serverless environment or AWS lambda Nagios and these other tools they don't scale like that they don't have the discovery capabilities they don't have the ability to be able to monitor at low low at very high frequencies and low latency so you end up with an environment and a micro services or cloud environment that looks something like this and it's constantly changing as containers and servers are brought up and brought down and something like a Nagios is just not gonna scale to this kind of environment so what is absorbability from Wikipedia it's in control theory observability is a measure of how well internal states of a system can be inferred from knowledge of the external outputs the observability and controllability of a system are mathematical tools meaning the more observable in us the more controllable it is so what does that all mean in English it means can you understand what's happening inside your code and inside your systems simply by asking questions using your tools can you answer any new question you can think of or are you only locked into answering questions that you're prepared for and that's really the difference between observability and monitor in monitoring you're answering questions that you're prepared for observability allows you to ask new questions that you may not have been prepared for and be able to find answers there's three pillars of observability metrics logging and tracing logging is logging I mean it's been around since the beginning of systems it's an immutable timestamp record of discrete events that happened over time this person logged in this process died this process started it's just it's a log of what happened tracing is a little bit newer a trace is a representative representation of a series of casually related distributed events that encode the end-to-end request flow through a distributed system so for example here that we're looking in this diagram we're looking at the trace of a DHCP request we're excuse me we're serving up the DHCP we're doing a read we're serving up all the information and then we're getting all the parameters and its timing how long each of the steps took so that you can then go back and troubleshoot where things might be broken and then of course you have metrics metrics are a numeric representation of data measured over time how full is my disk drive how much CPU am I using this graph here is looking at the peak go routines running among all instances anything that you can count in either a histogram or a gauge or whatever so what metrics should we be monitoring since we're pulling in metrics Google defines the four goals and signals latency traffic error and saturation latency is the time to service a request traffic is our requests per second errors are the error rates of requests not just did the request fail to give you a response but did it give you an incorrect response as well saturation is the fullness of the service how how are you scaling over time and they may be asking through all of this what about alerting alerting is an important part of it you want to be notified when things go very badly wrong and in an observability environment everything is a little bit more buttoned-up it's the attempt is to try to make sure that there are not as many false alarms there's a lot of statistical math that goes into the alerts or can go into them so example here are metrics based alert on state is my service up you can say is it up or down but you can also do things like do I have the correct number of load balancers that I expect my environment is supposed to have at least three do I have at least three and if I go down to to alert me metrics based thresholds is our load balancer 50% capacity in terms of sessions so am i running at 50 percent of the number of sessions our 50 percent of the tests taking longer than 10 minutes if you're running test transactions to make sure your environment is up and running are more than a half of them taking longer than 10 minutes if there are well then alert me because there must be a problem somewhere or that I need to investigate and then you have log based alerts based on threshold so for exists but this one here is looking for abuse of activity so if I see more than three events in 30 minutes then send me an alert also from the Google SR ebook which is site recovery site reliability engineering team send their pager worthy alerts to their on-call rotation and those should be your super critical you know hair on fire alerts and they're important but sub critical alerts go to their tricky queues everything else just gets retained as informational data and shows up as status on dashboards as CCSI has a visibility as a service offering which covers the three pillars of observability we have monitoring we have logging and tracing and the ability to look inside not just your infrastructure but inside any applications that you may be developing CCSI focuses on operational systems monitoring dynamic cloud environments whether they're public or private cloud the full-si icd process containers and container organism orchestration that could be docker cobranet these or any of the other container technologies aks Fargate whatever and so the latest and serverless technology like Amazon AWS land and services like that so just to kind of tie it all up all of this is so that you can start being more proactive you're not a firefighter the goal is to get alerts before if things go wrong before you users start complaining so try to be proactive and don't be a firefighter does anybody have any questions I had two questions Joe one was the tools that are used are they specific to si si si in-house tools or they tools that are available to the public there are tools that are available to the public that si si si has highly customized to for our customers to meet their needs and the other question was for the onboarding what's a typical you know time frame from beginning to end to get customer mid-sized customer up to speed for a proof-of-concept we could get somebody up and running online for a dozen or so servers or instances in probably under an hour to bring a full environment online it depends upon the customer but it's it's it's very simple it's we need the the IPS we need access and on certain devices we may need to install an agent thanks Joe I'd like to thank everyone for your time today your account manager and myself we'll be following up to discuss next steps thank you everyone and have a great day


## 영상 3: Monitoring and Logging for DevOps Engineers | Production Best Practices (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nD6JfA9nGOg)

do you remember the recent Microsoft outage that caused major disruptions all over the world due to a single crowd strike update hospitals were not working Banks were closed airports were shut down and all of this just because of a single update crazy right however this could have been easily avoided with proper monitoring and alerting practices now this is obviously a bad news for Microsoft but incidents like these proves how important monitoring and logging are in software development life cycle so in this video we will look at importance of monitoring and logging in devops processes what are some popular monitoring tools and also best practices when implementing monitoring and logging in your devops workflow this is going to be a very informative video I will also show you a demo of a very popular monitoring tool so make sure you watch this video till the end let's start so hey everyone and Welcome to Cloud champ logging and monitoring are absolutely important for a devops Engineers to know so let's begin with monitoring first so what is monitoring according to the definition monitoring is a process of continuously watching and measuring the performance of your applications systems or infrastructure this means collecting information like CPU usage memory consumption or other metrics to make sure your application is performing as you want now there are different types of monitorings depending on what kind of data do you want to monitor for example infrastructure monitoring which will look at the health of your servers networks databases Etc there is also application monitoring which will make sure your application is running fine by checking response rates transaction volumes or even error rates additionally there is also cost monitoring which is very common in Cloud architecture to make sure you're not spending more than than your specified budget apart from this there are also many other types of monitorings that you will come across when working as a devops engineer so this is a very high level overview of how monitoring happens in devops now let's look at logging similar to monitoring logging is also a very important devops practice which will provide you with information on what is happening inside your application using logging you can detect and troubleshoot issues in production environment so what is logging according to the definition logging is a process of capturing and storing data generated by your systems or applications which is very important for troubleshooting in case you got some issues this is what logs look like logs are timestamp data which will tell you what is happening inside your systems and there are different types of logs like error log info log debug log Etc so imagine you have an application running on a kubernetes cluster on Linux operating machine and you also have logging enabled for it so the the system logs will provide you with information about the health of the system CPU performance Etc the kubernetes logs will capture events which will help you troubleshoot issues like pod failures deployment issues service not exposed or which node is taking more CPU or Ram information like this whereas the application log will focus more on the application related activities like application is not working properly there is a latency issues or customers are facing some problems all that you can also get security logs which can help you track any unauthorized access on your application or your kubernetes cluster logs or logging make it so easy to find and troubleshoot issues so this is why as a devops engineer you need to know how to read logs and also how to enable logs for your applications or kubernetes cluster now that we have understood what monitoring and logging is along with an example I hope you understood how important it is to have logging and monitoring enabled for your applications as a devops engineer in the devops market right now there are so many different monitoring and logging tools you would have definitely heard about the popular open source monitoring tool which is Prometheus and grafana Prometheus along with grafana is used to collect and also visualize metrics in a good dashboard for logging you can use open search or log stash Jager is a very popular tracing tool so there are separate tools for monitoring for logging for tracing but this is not how we do in real devops projects we need a single tool let me explain why you will need a single tool for monitoring logging and tracing let's say you have an application which is facing some issues while checking metrics you found out that the CPU utilization is very high you're going to go deep inside the logs and traces to find out the root cause on why is my CPU high so we are going to be using metrics traces and logs all together and this is why we need a singular tool such as logs. so what is logs. logs. is a very popular observability platform that is used by many big organization like Unity cens sneak and many more for this demo I have an open Elementary application deployed on AWS and I will be using logs. to check metrix analyze logs and traces thank you logs. for sponsoring this video and sending me amazing swags make sure to check out logs. the link is in description let's get into the demo now and this is my logs. account I will be using this account account to work you through the demo but if you want to create your account you can create it for free from the link in the description all you need is to fill in your details and start using logs doio to analyze your logs metrics and traces but if you're a company or an organization who is looking for an observability tool you can also schedule a demo with the logs. team to understand how you can use logs. I for your applications logs. is designed to collect and analyze Telemetry data which includes metrics logs Braes and even security information through S so logs are managed by open search which provid you with robust analytical capabilities metrics are handled through Prometheus a very powerful monitoring solution whereas traces are managed through jger providing you with distributed tracing to understand how microservices talk to each other which means you get the best of monitoring tool all in one platform let's start with logs first logs are very important to monitor any app application and logs doio makes it so easier with all its different feature let me show you a demo right now we have logs here and you can filter logs based on a particular keyword or also timestamp but along with this you also have another feature where you can get more information about any log using this machine learning option which is observability IQ so using this you can get to know more information about anything in your logs so let's say you want to get more information about this code Lineo you can just ask the AI to tell you more about it and then it will give you information which will make it more easy for you to troubleshoot any errors or any issues that you get inside your logs let's say we asking tell me the most common error log and then it gives you an output based on the provided data there are no error logs now let's talk about metrics logs. uses Prometheus to collect and visualize metrics you can get metrics from ec2 instances kubernetes clusters and lot more logs. can be integrated with all the major clouds and also programming languages so I have all these different dashboards here along with this you can also run queries Additionally you also have alerting that you can set up to get alerts for a particular metrics you can get races for Individual Services for example ad service or account service or checkout service here so this is very important whenever you have a microservices architecture next amazing feature that I like about logs. I is this app 360 which is way better than any traditional application performance monitoring tool using App 360 you can get information or metrics about all your different Microsoft services on a single page so if you want to know how is your accounting service performing you can see that here right on app 360 you can also compare how this service is working compared to yesterday so you can also do that here this is made particularly for kubernetes and microservices application and talking about kubernetes you also have kubernetes 360 similar to app 360 you can get information about all your pods notes different Services inside your cluster on a single page which makes it so much easy to troubleshoot and also solve different kubernetes error so if you have a kubernetes application make sure to check out or use kubernetes 360 here wow isn't this amazing your company might be using some other monitoring tool maybe Prometheus or Cloud watch or maybe something else but you can obviously suggest them to use lobs doio for your application as a devops engineer you need to have experience with any one of the monitoring tool that your company might be using now that you know this let's summarize all the information we have got in this video by looking at Best Practices when implementing devops and logging for your application so the first best practice when setting up monitoring and logging for your application is to follow centralized approach make sure your monitoring and logging systems are all at one place so that you can check metrics analyze log Trace events all of them on a single platform like logs. second best practice is to make sure you are collecting important data rather than collecting garbage data and to do this you can Implement proper log retention policies to balance between storing important data for troubleshooting and compliance while also making sure that you are managing your storage cost this is very important because I've seen many companies who store all kind of logs which they are not using and hence they are paying a lot for storage so make sure you have proper log retention policies third important best practice is to make sure you set automate alerts so you should set automated actionable alerts for metrics that are important for your business to make sure you can detect and troubleshoot issues very very quickly before your customer finds out many monitoring tools support slack Gmail Etc even logs. supports it so make sure you check it out next thing to keep in your mind is scalability make sure you have a monitoring solution which should scale up along with your infrastructure and should also be able to handle large volumes of data last but not least make sure you have a tight security you should be enabling security logs to find out any authorized access or online attacks that could cause issues to your systems before it happens so these are some best practices you should keep in mind when you set up monitoring and logging in your application so this was our video on what monitoring and logging is and how it helps in devops workflow as a devops engineer it is very very very important to understand monitoring and logging so I hope this video was informative if you have any questions any doubt feel free to let me know in the comment section also make sure to check out logs. an amazing observability tool they are providing you with a free account the links is in description I going to be creating an observability project thank you and have a good day bye

===== [출처 강의: 08_컨테이너와_자동화도구_개관] =====
## 영상 1: 10 DevOps Tools you need to know - The Complete Guide (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UMQGyeAnfFE)

This video is aimed at giving you a short, but comprehensive overview of the core DevOps tools, that you need to build DevOps processes. So let's get to it right away!

At the very core of DevOps we have a release pipeline, commonly known as a CI/CD pipeline. So CI/CD tool is the most essential part of DevOps Engineer's toolkit. The most popular and still most widely used one being Jenkins. There are alternatives like GitLab CI is becoming really good or GitHub Actions, Circle CI and many more. So these tools are about how to create automated release pipelines, which run tests, build the application, do different types of application scanning and deploy to the end environment. And that involves its integrations with Git, Docker registry, cloud platforms, pipeline as code with Jenkinsfile and so on. Okay, we're testing and releasing application and deploying it, but where are we deploying the application. We need a deployment environment and that's where cloud platforms, like AWS come in. So AWS services, the virtual instances, security groups around servers, access to application running on the server, configuring the server and so on. Okay cool, we are releasing and deploying applications to AWS virtual machines let's say, but what are we releasing exactly? And in which form? You need to understand how the application is packaged and how it runs on the end environment. The new standard way of packaging and running applications is Docker. Docker packages software into standardized units called "containers" that have everything the software needs to run including libraries, system tools, code and runtime. And this improves the development in deployment process. You can quickly deploy and scale applications into any environment and know your code will run. Again there are similar tools, but Docker wins here as well. So we would create Docker images in the CI/CD pipeline and run the application as Docker container on AWS server for example. Now Docker made it easy to create and run applications, so engineers went wild and scaled up applications, because it is easy to do with Docker. But that made the lives of application operations team harder again. With DevOps we are saying no separate Dev and Ops, we want to unify them, so how to make running dockerized microservices applications easier? Docker is lightweight and cool, but ephemeral and stateless. So how do we restart applications when they fail, how do we scale and replicate applications or microservices if they are getting a lot of requests? How do we run distributed applications like database clusters and so on. Making sure that application is always available, even if some parts of it fail. Also a network of hundreds of containers, when they run on multiple servers, how do we manage that? So Kubernetes, which is a container orchestration platform, comes to rescue with all these solutions and even more complexity. So Kubernetes has an auto-healing feature and the network layer that makes thousands of containers seem like part of one server. It has auto-scheduling and much more. Scaling applications up and down as we need is super easily done. Just specifying replica counts in Kubernetes deployments. And you can also scale up and down the servers by adding additional worker nodes or control plane nodes easily. Now I know I spent like half of those 10 minutes on Kubernetes alone, but I'm sure you will understand if you know my channel and my passion for Kubernetes. Cool, we have thousands of containers or even tens of thousands of containers, which is great and Kubernetes manages a lot of the operations automatically. And that's great, but what if things go wrong in the cluster, let's say we have applications equipped with great logging and we have all the information, but we can't possibly manually look into logs and metrics of thousands of applications and see what's going on. Maybe someone is trying to hack into our application and our application is logging and screaming about it, but we don't know. What about third-party applications, maybe databases is under heavy load or the servers are under attack. Somebody's trying to SSH into it or do a port scanning to see what ports are open and so on. With so much workload, we need automatic monitoring and alerting in place that uses the data that we have in the logs and alerts us if something is out of natural behavior. Again security attacks or maybe a harmless misconfiguration in Kubernetes manifest file that has created a mess in the cluster. So monitoring and alerting is essential on all levels like infrastructure runtime and application itself and for Kubernetes specifically, a popular monitoring tool is Prometheus, which comes with a whole stack for monitoring, alerting and visualizing the metrics data. Talking about issues in the cluster they may make the cluster to crash and get into a state that we can't recover. Imagine we configure the cluster on AWS, we have thousands of servers with tens of thousands of containers running on them and we have configured monitoring and 100 other services in the cluster and now it's all gone, because of misconfiguration issues or hacking attacks or whatever. How can we possibly recover all that? How can we recreate this state again? And that's where Infrastructure as Code helps, because it's really difficult and sometimes impossible to do that manually or it would take just weeks or month. So with Infrastructure as Code we actually script this entire setup: spinning up AWS resources, Kubernetes cluster, installing all the services. And if something happens, we just run the script again and it recreates everything. Terraform is the most popular tool that allows infrastructure as code. Now sometimes if we're working directly on the operating system like installing packages, maybe doing security patches etc like on Kubernetes worker nodes, that's where configuration management tools like Ansible may be helpful. Again with the scale of Kubernetes, we may have hundreds or thousands of worker nodes and let's say if you need to do a security patch on those or do an upgrade to the latest container runtime, you don't want to be login into each server manually and executing the scripts. With Ansible, just write a script once provided with a list of servers as targets and it will automatically push out and execute scripts on those targets and give you a nice output summary of the state. Now infrastructure as code is code, configuration as code is also code. again if you're writing Jenkinsfile, that's also code. Or the Dockerfile or Kubernetes manifest files. So we need to write all of these in a code editor such as Visual Studio Code, provide a bunch of plugins and features for specific languages or tools that actually help you write those scripts. They have auto-completion or error checking integrated and so on and it's a simple tool, but it is definitely a needed one in DevOps. Now obviously you aren't working alone. Well, hopefully not! But rather in a team with other engineers, so as DevOps engineer you aren't coding the application features themselves, but you are writing pipeline code, Dockerfiles, Helm charts etc. So basically code, which is part of the application or you are writing infrastructures code scripts, which are in a separate project. Well, you need to make that code available and transparent for teams for other engineers, ideally with history of changes and ideally with its own release pipeline to apply infrastructure changes the same way as application changes are applied. Well that's where you need the knowledge of Git to do all that with your infrastructures code as well as just collaborate with other engineers on code changes. Now this is an obvious one, but obviously you can't do much if you don't know Linux and Linux command line. Docker is a lightweight virtual computer, mostly based on Linux, Worker nodes in Kubernetes are servers mostly with Linux operating system. So even with Infrastructure as Code and all the automations, you will still be working a lot with Linux and working with command line interface. So that's kind of a must here. Now as you see, when building DevOps processes these tools need to be combined and used together. So even if you know them individually you need to learn how to integrate these tools, like deploy from Jenkins to Kubernetes environment, which is running on AWS and has AWS service integrations, and all that written in Terraform. And again for that Terraform code that lives in Git repository, you may build a CI/CD pipeline. And all of this is containerized, even Jenkins instances may be running as containers. And learning these tools in isolation is already challenging, but learning to combine them in a secure properly configured way with industry best practices is way more challenging and that's exactly why we created the DevOps Bootcamp and are now working on DevSecOps course to teach exactly that, building complete DevOps and DevSecOps processes with all these tools and even more. And more importantly teaching the underlying concepts for each step so that you can easily replace and swap out the tools, when you need to, because when you understand what you are doing and why on a conceptual level, tools just become means to an end and easily replaceable. And for us that was extremely important part of creating those courses. If you want to learn all that or get more details, you can check out the video description for more information on our courses and programs. Now I hope I was able to give you some valuable, quick information in this video. Feel free to share the video with others, who want to get a short overview of DevOps tools and also let us know in the comments what interesting exciting DevOps tools do you work with or work for besides the ones I mentioned here. And with that thank you for watching and see you in the next video! :)


## 영상 2: The Complete DevOps Roadmap (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6GQRb4fGvtk)

If you're looking to break into DevOps or want to level up your skills you're in the right place. Today I'm sharing the complete DevOps roadmap. I'll walk you through the essential skills you need, the tools I personally recommend, and how much time you should spend on each. Assuming you dedicate 3 to 5 hours of studying every day, this roadmap should take you about 10 to 14 months to complete.

Let's Jump Right In. First off we have Linux fundamentals. Linux is the backbone of servers and development environments. As a DevOps engineer you'll be setting up and maintaining the infrastructure where applications run. Most servers use Linux, so getting comfortable with it, especially the command line, is crucial. I recommend starting with learning Bash, which is the most commonly used shell and scripting language in Linux. Spend about 2 to 3 weeks on this. Make sure to learn basic Linux commands for working with the file system, permissions and ownership, processes and signals, as well as managing packages.

Next you need to learn networking concepts. Networking is all about how computers communicate with each other. Think IP addresses and protocols. You need to understand how data moves around, security, and troubleshoot network issues. To get hands-on experience I recommend using Wireshark. Dedicate around two weeks on this. Make sure to learn concepts like OSI and TCP/IP models, IP addressing and subnetting, DNS and DHCP, networking protocols like HTTP, HTTPS, FTP and SSH, firewalls and security groups, and basic network troubleshooting using tools like Ping, traceroute and netstat.

Now let's talk about Git. Git is a version control system that lets you track changes in your code and collaborate with others. It's essential for working on projects with a team and managing your code effectively. Spend one to two weeks getting comfortable with Git. Make sure to learn basic Git commands like clone, commit, push and pull, branching and merging, resolving merge conflicts, working with remote repositories and so on.

After that you should dive into programming languages. Programming languages like Python, Ruby and Go are used to automate tasks and manage configurations. While there are several other languages, I personally recommend Python for its simplicity, powerful libraries and versatility. Dedicate four to 6 weeks to build a solid foundation in Python. Make sure to Learn Python syntax and data structures like lists, dictionaries, sets and tuples, modules and packages, learn how to write and execute Python scripts, work with files, handle errors, write automation scripts and so on. By the way, to help you on this journey I've created a free supplementary PDF that breaks down the specific concepts you need to learn for each skill. It's a great resource to review your progress, find gaps in your knowledge, and prepare for interviews. You can find the link in the description box. Also I have a bunch of tutorials on this channel and complete courses on my website if you're looking for structured learning. Again links are in the description box.

Moving on, let's talk about Cloud providers. Cloud providers like AWS, Azure and Google Cloud Platform offer a range of services for building and deploying applications. If you're just starting out I recommend focusing on one cloud provider, and AWS is a great choice because it's the most widely used. Spend about 4 to 6 weeks on this. Make sure to learn how to launch, configure and manage virtual servers, store and manage data, get familiar with IAM managing users, groups and roles, and how to set up and manage isolated networks.

Next up is containerization. Containerization is all about packaging an application and its dependencies into a container to ensure it runs the same everywhere. Docker is the go-to tool for this. Spend about 3 to four weeks getting comfortable with Docker. Learn how to create Docker images, get familiar with starting, stopping and managing containers, learn how to write Dockerfiles, explore how to define and run multicontainer applications using Docker Compose and so on.

Now let's dive into continuous integration and deployment, or CI/CD. CI/CD automates the integration and deployment of code changes allowing for frequent and reliable releases. Jenkins is a powerful tool for setting up CI/CD pipelines, but other popular tools include GitLab CI/CD, Circle CI and Travis CI. If you're starting out, just focus on Jenkins for its versatility and strong community support. Dedicate 3 to four weeks on this. Make sure to understand how to create and manage Jenkins pipelines, get familiar with writing Jenkinsfiles, learn how to integrate automated tests into your pipelines, understand how to automate the build process for your applications, explore how to automate the deployment of your applications to various environments and so on.

Moving forward, let's discuss orchestration and management. Orchestration tools like Kubernetes and Helm help automate the deployment, scaling and management of containerized applications. These tools are essential for managing complex applications in production. Start with Kubernetes and spend about four to 6 weeks on it. Make sure to learn about the overall architecture including the master node and worker nodes and how they interact, understand the key components such as pods, services and deployments, get familiar with managing resources, learn how to scale your applications, as well as the networking model in Kubernetes.

Next we have networking and infrastructure services. This involves setting up and managing services like reverse proxies, forward proxies, caching servers, firewalls and load balancers. I recommend using NGINX for handling reverse proxies and load balancing. Give this about 3 to 4 weeks of your time. Learn how to set up and configure NGINX as a reverse proxy, understand how to configure it to act as a forward proxy, explore caching strategies to improve the performance, and how to configure firewalls and security groups.

Now let's talk about configuration management. Configuration management tools like Ansible, Puppet and Chef automate the deployment, configuration and management of servers and applications. If you're starting out just focus on Ansible due to its simplicity and powerful features. Spend 3 to four weeks on this. Learn how to write Ansible playbooks, understand how to use roles and modules, learn to manage variables and templates and so on.

Moving on, let's discuss infrastructure as code, or IaC. IaC involves managing and provisioning computing infrastructure through machine readable configuration files. Popular tools include Terraform, AWS CloudFormation and Pulumi. If you're starting out just focus on Terraform for its flexibility and widespread use. Dedicate 3 to four weeks to build a solid foundation in Terraform. Understand the basic concepts like providers and resources, get familiar with writing Terraform configuration files, learn how to use Terraform modules, as well as advanced concepts such as workspaces and remote state.

Finally, let's talk about monitoring and logging. Monitoring and logging tools such as Prometheus, Grafana, ELK stack and Fluent D track the performance and health of your applications and infrastructure. If you're starting out just focus on Prometheus and Grafana. Spend about 3 to four weeks on these tools. Learn the architecture and data model of Prometheus, get familiar with collecting metrics from various sources, learn how to write queries to extract and analyze metrics data, understand how to set up alerts and so on.

So if you dedicate 3 to 5 hours every day you can follow this roadmap and pick up all the skills you need to become a DevOps engineer in about 10 to 14 months. If you have any questions please let me know in the comments below and I'll do my best to answer you right here or in my future videos. If you enjoyed this video please give it a like and subscribe for more useful content. Thanks for watching.


## 영상 3: 개발자를 위한 쉬운 도커 (2024 NEW) | 컨테이너, 도커, 쿠버네티스의 개념을 엄청 쉽게 알려드려요. (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eRfHp16qJq8)

IT 업계에 계신 분들은 컨테이너와 도커, 쿠버네티스를 정말 많이 들어보셨을 겁니다. 이 개념들을 이해하기 위해서 여러분은 딱 세 개만 기억하시면 됩니다. 오늘은 아주 짧게 컨테이너에 대해서 말씀드리고 도커와 쿠버네티스가 무엇인지에 대해서 이야기해 보려고 합니다. 비전공자분들도 쉽게 이해하실 수 있을 정도로 기술적인 설명은 쫙 빼고 개념만 잡으실 수 있도록 쉽게 설명해 드리겠습니다.

컨테이너를 도입해야 한다, 또는 쿠버네티스로 전환해야 한다 이런 얘기들을 많이 접해 보셨을 거예요. 그런데 도대체 컨테이너가 뭐길래 중요하다고 하는 걸까요? 일단 컨테이너를 한마디로 정의하자면 컨테이너는 서버의 한 종류입니다. 그러면 이제 서버에 대해서 알아야겠죠. 서버는 프로그램 소프트웨어가 실행되는 하드웨어를 의미합니다. 간단하게 컴퓨터랑 비슷한 개념이라고 생각하시면 되고요. 모든 회사들은 IT 서비스를 제공하기 위해서 소프트웨어를 운영하고 있습니다. 그리고 이 소프트웨어는 개발자분들이 열심히 개발한 작업의 결과물이죠. 개발자는 자신의 PC에서 소프트웨어를 개발할 때 소스 코드를 임시 소프트웨어로 만들어서 자신의 PC에서 실행하고 테스트합니다. 그러면 개발을 마치고 결과물로 만들어진 소프트웨어는 고객에게 서비스로 제공하기 위해서 개발자의 PC가 아니라 인터넷 어딘가에서 실행이 되어야 하겠죠. 이 소프트웨어가 바로 서버에서 실행이 됩니다. 서버는 여러분의 회사의 서버실에 있을 수도 있고 클라우드 같은 온라인 서버를 사용할 수도 있습니다.

그런데 PC에서 개발한 소프트웨어는 보통은 메모리가 2에서 4기가만 있어도 충분히 실행할 수 있는데요. 서버실에 있는 서버는 사양이 아주 좋은 컴퓨터입니다. 그래서 보통 32GB, 64GB 메모리를 가지고 있기 때문에 하나의 서버에서 아주 많은 소프트웨어를 실행해야 합니다. 보통은 여러분의 PC에서 브라우저나 메모장, 엑셀 같은 프로그램을 한 번에 실행하시잖아요. 큰 문제가 되나 싶기도 하지만 이 IT 서비스로 제공되는 소프트웨어는 아주 중요하게 다루셔야 합니다. 브라우저야 튕기면 다시 실행하면 되지만 회사의 소프트웨어가 다운되면 서비스의 장애로 이어지게 되죠. 그래서 하나의 서버에서는 하나의 소프트웨어만 실행하는 것이 안전합니다. 그러면 64GB 컴퓨터에서 4GB 소프트웨어를 하나만 실행하면 너무 낭비 아닐까요? 그래서 IT 회사들은 가상화라는 기술을 사용해서 하나의 컴퓨터에서 여러 개의 소프트웨어를 실행합니다.

여러분이 1층짜리 건물주가 됐다고 생각해 보겠습니다. 생각만 해도 행복하시죠. 그런데 이 건물에는 공간을 구분하기 없어서 임대인을 한 명밖에 못 받는다고 합니다. 저희가 지금 서버에서 마주한 문제와 비슷하죠. 건물은 임대인을 많이 받아서 월세도 많이 받고 상권 활성화도 시켜야 하는데 한 명만 사는 건물은 너무 비효율적이죠. 마치 서버에서 하나의 소프트웨어만 실행하는 것이 비효율적인 것처럼 말이죠.

그래서 생각을 한게 임시로 벽을 세워두고 공간을 분리해서 여러 명이 사는 집으로 활용을 할 수 있을 것입니다. 건물을 서버라고 생각하시면 서버도 마찬가지로 이렇게 임시로 벽을 세워서 소프트웨어가 실행되는 공간을 분리하는 기술이 있습니다. 이 기술을 가상화 기술이라고 부르고요. 그래서 가상화 기술을 사용하면 하나의 컴퓨터에서 여러 개의 프로그램을 안전하게 실행할 수 있는 것이죠. 이 가상화 기술은 아주 오래 전부터 프로그램을 운영하는 방식이었습니다. 예전부터 사용되던 가상화 방식은 VM, 가상 머신이라는 방식을 사용했었는데요. 이 가상 머신 방식은 프로그램을 실행하고 프로그램을 업그레이드하는데 시간이 오래 걸렸습니다.

컨테이너도 마찬가지로 서버에서 프로그램을 실행하기 위한 가상화 기술입니다. 컨테이너 가상화를 사용하면 한대의 서버에서 여러 개의 프로그램을 안전하게 실행할 수 있죠. 그런데 같은 방식인데도 컨테이너가 주목받는 이유는 컨테이너가 기존의 가상 기술보다 가볍고 빠르기 때문입니다. 다시 건물 이야기로 잠깐 돌아오면 가벽이 그저 벽도 세워야 하고 임대인이 바뀌면 공사도 다시 해야 하겠죠. 그런데 여기서 여러분이 획기적인 아이디어를 떠올린 겁니다. 임대인이 살 수 있는 컨테이너를 만들어 놓고 입주할 때마다 컨테이너를 통째로 옮겨서 건물 안에 넣는 것이죠. 그러면 공사할 필요도 없이 컨테이너만 안으로 옮기면 되고 입주 기간이 끝나면 컨테이너만 통째로 처분해 버리면 되는 거죠.

그 가상화 기술을 사용할 때 전통적으로 사용하던 가상 머신 방식에서 컨테이너를 사용하는 방식으로 많이 전환하고 있는 것입니다. 정리하자면 컨테이너를 사용하면 한대의 서버에서 여러 개의 소프트웨어를 안전하게 실행할 수 있고요. 전통적인 방식보다 더 효율적으로 소프트웨어를 운영할 수 있습니다. 자 그럼 이제 여러분의 건물에 드디어 첫 입주민이 이사를 온다고 합니다. 이제 여러분은 컨테이너를 만들어야 하는데요. 그런데 여러분은 건물을 관리하는 사람이지 컨테이너를 만드는 사람이 아니기 때문에 직접 컨테이너를 만드는 것은 아주 비효율적일 것입니다. 인테리어를 시공 업체에게 맡기는 것처럼 뭐든지 전문가가 있는 것이죠. 그리고 이 도커는 컨테이너를 관리해 주는 전문가입니다. 여러분은 그냥 도커에 컨테이너를 만들어 줘라고 지시만 하시면 됩니다. 번거로운 일들은 도커가 알아서 처리해 줍니다.

정리하자면 도커는 컨테이너를 관리하기 위한 일종의 프로그램입니다. 여러분의 PC에 도커를 설치하면 컨테이너를 쉽게 다룰 수 있습니다. 이제 여러분의 컨테이너 아이디어를 통해서 임대 사업이 아주 잘 되었고요. 그래서 건물이 총 세 대가 되었습니다. 그래서 각각의 건물에 컨테이너를 관리하는 도커 전문가를 한 명씩 배치해 놓고 세 개의 건물에 컨테이너를 관리하기 시작했습니다. 이제 여러분의 전화기에는 불이 나기 시작합니다. 매일매일 입주자가 들어오고 명령을 지시해야 되는 도커가 세 개나 되기 때문이죠. 이대로는 사업을 지속적으로 운영하기 힘들어 보입니다. 그래서 여러분은 매니저를 한 명 고용하기로 하죠. 이름은 쿠버네티스 합니다.

쿠버네티스는 도커가 실행 중인 여러 대의 서버를 관리하기 위한 도구입니다. 그래서 오케스트레이션 도구라고 부르죠. 오케스트라의 지휘자처럼 여러 대의 서버에서 실행 중인 도커에 지시를 내려줍니다. 이제 여러분이 해야 할 일은 책상에 앉아서 커피 한 잔 하시면서 쿠버네티스게 명령을 하는 것이죠. 쿠버네티스는 아주 똑똑한 직원이기 때문에 사소한 것 하나하나마다 일일이 명령을 하지 않으셔도 됩니다. 여러분이 원하는 상태만 문서로 정리해시면 쿠버네티스가 알아서 도커를 통해 컨테이너를 관리해 줍니다.

여기까지가 컨테이너, 도커, 쿠버네티스 개념을 건물주가 된 행복한 상상을 하면서 정리해 보았습니다. 오늘은 많은 이야기를 전달해 드렸는데 여러분은 딱 세 개만 기억하시면 됩니다. 컨테이너를 사용하면 한대의 서버에서 여러 개의 소프트웨어를 안전하고 효율적으로 운영할 수 있습니다. 도커는 컨테이너를 관리하기 위한 도구로 일종의 프로그램입니다. 쿠버네티스는 서버가 여러 대 있는 환경에서 각각의 서버의 도커에 대신 지시해 주는 오케스트레이션 도구입니다.

오늘은 기술적인 이야기는 빼고 말씀드렸기 때문에 실제로 도커의 원리를 이해하고 직접 사용해 보고 싶으신 분들은 저와 함께 쉬운 도커 강의에서 학습을 이어 나가시면 좋을 것 같습니다. 네 그럼 다음 영상에서 찾아뵙겠습니다.
