Kind: captions
Language: en
Woo, buddy, not gonna lie to you, this is looking pretty rough.
Yeah, you got pods that are talking to services they shouldn't even have access to, you got
no ingress rules, your DNS is just flapping all over the place, you got this sidecar container
that's just crying, and I haven't even touched your network policies yet, okay, so how much
to fix it? Honestly, to fix this mess, you're looking at about six days, three thousand dollars
and your cluster's soul. You know what, forget it, I'll just fix it myself. What? You take
an Alta3 course or something? You're damn right I did.
Try and understand how networking works and Kubernetes can be a nightmare.
Fortunately, we're going to crack open this nut and we're going to take a look under the hood
with how Kubernetes networking objects work, how they connect to each other, what has changed,
and what you need to know in order to implement it inside of your cluster.
Let's get started. First thing we're going to do is we're going to make something that we're
actually going to network to. This is the deployment, there's nothing sexy about it at all.
I just want to point out that these are the labels that are going to be on the pods,
they're going to be app engine x demo, make sure you remember that for later. Now what this
deployment did is that it just spun up two pods, both of which are running an engine x image inside
of them. That's not really important. But what you should notice is that both of these pods have
their own IP addresses, Kubernetes gives every pod its own IP address. And the thing is, is that
Kubernetes networking is flat means that all pods can talk to each other by default. So what we're
going to do is that we are going to create another pod. The whole purpose of the second pod here,
which as you can see is running a busy box image inside of it, is that we can actually execute
curl commands. So I am inside of one of my containers at the moment. And inside of this busy
box container, I'm going to send a W get command to the IP address of that very first pod. And
check it out. What you're seeing is the index page of engine x. Remember how I said that's what was
running inside of our deployment. Well, the fact that we're seeing it from this busy box container
guarantees that yes, we are accessing engine x from another pod. So that's proof that this is
working whenever you see it. Now the thing about deployments is is that if you should happen to
delete them, like I'm doing right now, they will be recreated automatically. Now, the next thing to
see is that those IP addresses are different. So if I were to go back inside of my original busy
box pod, and I were to run this W get a command, obviously, it's not working, because that IP
address is no longer valid. Just goes to show just because you can do this doesn't mean that you
should. We're going to take a look at a much better option. That better option is this a service.
A service is kind of like a great big neon arrow that you would see like in Las Vegas or something.
And it's just constantly flashing at pod saying, Here it is, here it is that IP address you're
looking for. Here it is. Inside of the service, you can see that in its selector field, it's pointing
to app engine x demo. Can you remember anything that has that particular label? Yeah, it's those
pods that are being created by our deployment. Now I just created that service. And what I'll
point out that you can see here is, is that the type is cluster IP. There are three different types
of services cluster IP, node port, and load balancer cluster IP is the most common type,
it is used strictly for internal communication. So just pod to pod inside of the cluster. There's
nothing external about it. And it's therefore the most common type of service there is. Anyway,
if we were to describe this pod here real quick, take a look at rather describe this service,
take a look down at that endpoints line. Do you see those IP addresses that it's pointing to?
And you see how those IP addresses are the exact same as the ones that belong to our deployment.
Now here's something really cool. I'm going to delete all of the pods that you see up there at
the top. And because their deployments, they're going to come back. And as we've seen, they're
going to have different IP addresses. But do you see that service? It's automatically grabbing the
new IP addresses of that pod. So there's nothing that we can do to these pods,
they will always have their IP addresses found. So now that we have a service created,
let's make this busy box pod one more time. And this time, instead of running my W get command
against a static IP address, I'm just going to call the name of the service. Check it out. It's
still working. And this is the primary means through which pods talk to each other inside of
a cluster. Okay, so cluster IP services, let us communicate between pods. But here's the thing,
Kubernetes by default, allows all traffic. It's peace and love, man. You can talk to anybody you
want to man. And that's to that. That's terribly not secure. We need to come up with a better
solution. So what we're going to do is we are going to learn about our next type of object,
a network policy. So a network policy, I often describe it in my classes as being kind of like
an overprotective parent, like they've got their kid, their pod that belongs to them, at least
that's how they see it. And they're like, you can't talk to that kid across the street, or no,
you can't talk to that girl down the road, you can only talk to you can only talk to that nice
boy just down the the other side of the street. So what we're doing this network policy is that
we are attaching it to a namespace demo. And that's where our deployment was located. And
what we're going to say is is that all the little pods that have the label app engine x demo,
you belong to us, you're my little pod. And my rules are what go for you. Now, the rules that
we're setting are what ingress can these pods receive app engine x demo, there's that label again,
those are pods that belong to our deployment. What would happen next is, is that we would
describe where these pods allowed to receive traffic from. Clearly, we're not doing that,
which means that this is what's called a deny all network policy. So if we were to create this
network policy here, and if one more time we were to fire up this busybox pod,
we saw that this was working just a moment ago. But when we run this W get again,
it's hanging. And if we wait long enough, it's going to have like a bad connection message.
So the network policy is doing its job, it is preventing any connection from occurring. Now,
the thing about network policies is is that they are incredibly granular, as you can imagine,
you can be very precise about Oh, I only want to receive ingress from pods that are like this,
or in this IP address range, or from this namespace. And likewise, you can set rules for egress,
like you're only allowed to talk to pods in this range and that namespace with da da da.
There's many different options on how to do that. But we're going to keep things simple.
What we're going to do is that I'm going to add just right here under the spec a new section.
Which is now saying that all of my little pods inside of the demo namespace that have the label
app engine x demo, you are allowed to receive ingress from any pods that have the label
access granted is what the new rules are. So if we go back down and we were to apply that deny
all that YAML, the rules have changed. What we're going to do is that we are going to stop
and rebuild this busy box container. But notice this time, we're going to put the label access
granted on top of it. And as it turns out, that is going to be the secret sauce that when we run
this W get command again, this time it works. There's that engine x welcome page, because we
have configured the network policy to allow that communication to occur. So now we're going to
start getting into some more complicated stuff. What we're now going to take a look at are ingress
controllers. And ingress controllers are meant to just be another layer of abstraction on top of
what we've already built, a deployment, a service that points to that deployment. And now we're
going to be placing ingress controllers and ingress on top. This is just a tool that gives you the
means of providing like more granular control over how access to that service and therefore your
pods actually works. And the thing is, is that ingress controllers are third party, there are
many different ones to choose from. Pretty popular one is the engine x controller and I'll put the
link down in the chat to this particular page. As you can see, there are many different ways to
install it because there are many different ways to launch a Kubernetes cluster. But I'm going to
go ahead and get this installed and set up, you'll just have to find the instructions that work for
you and your setup. Now once you get the ingress controller installed, and once you've got your
service and you got your deployment written, then you're ready to get started, right? Well,
not so much. What I'm going to do is in this diagram, we're going to work our way from the right
to left to understand what exactly is running in my cluster right now. And then we're going to
actually see it work. So we already wrote that deployment is running an engine x image. And
then we made a service that exposes that engine x image. What we're going to do in just a moment
is that we're going to write what is called an ingress manifest. And the whole purpose of that
is that if somebody we're trying to access our cluster from an external URL, it will be redirected
to that particular service. Now, in order for an ingress controller to work, you do need to have
a load balancer. If you are using a cloud setup, that's super easy, you're super spoiled. All right,
they get spun up for you automatically and like Eks and GKE, right? But what I'll be doing inside
of my setup is that I'm going to be configuring my Linux machine, which has engine x installed as a
service to basically be its own janky little load balancer, it's going to listen for incoming requests.
And if one of those requests goes to a particular port two to two four, that will be redirected
to our node to the ingress controller to ingress, which will then go to our service. Clear as mud.
Well, you'll see what I'm doing here in just a second. But the base URL that first part is going
to be this really weird URL, I'm going to show you in just a minute. So that really long and strange
URL that starts with aux one, I work for all two three, we have our own training platform. And this
is the unique URL to my setup that I have that is connected to port two to two four on my local
host virtual machine here, beachhead. Basically, what I want to do is that if I go to that particular
URL, I want it to point straight to my deployment that's running inside of my cluster. What I'll
be doing inside of this lab is and this is just unique to me, this is not necessarily something
that you have to do inside of your own setup, is that I am configuring engine x on my local
beachhead, so that it is listing on port 2224. And it will send upstream that traffic to either
of the nodes inside of my cluster node one and node two. That 30934 number that you're seeing,
that is a node port. Remember how I said there are multiple kinds of services.
A node port is another type of service. And what it allows is external communication. And what I've
got on my screen here is a quick output of our ingress controller that got installed when I
installed it inside of my cluster. Take a look under ports. Do you see how next to 443 that in
engine x that is its HTTPS port 30934. That's the node port that I had configured my load balancer
to redirect to. So that's just what I'm doing for this to work inside of my environment,
as long as you've got that mapped, it'll work. Okay, so what I'm showing you here is that I'm
just keeping myself honest, that pain up at the top, which is student at bchd beachhead,
that is a virtual machine that is not part of the cluster. It is not a node. It is just a work
station, right? It has cube control installed. But that's it. I'm going to use this curl command
against that aux one URL. And inside of that deployment, we swapped out from engine x to
something else, just a little message that will make you feel good when it works. It works. Okay,
and now we're going to be getting into our last topic, gateway API's. We are now at the tip of
the pyramid that we've built our way up since the beginning, that we started with our deployment,
which we exposed with a service, which we controlled with a network policy, which we were
then able to expose externally with an ingress controller. And now here we are at gateway API's
gateway API, very complicated, and also still kind of in the new side of what's going on with
Kubernetes. As of right now, when you are creating a gateway API, you're actually making multiple
objects. The ultimate goal, ultimately, is to be able to have a lot more control, like in granularity,
over routing and like what it is that you are allowing like extensibility and multi tendency,
it's a whole bunch of things. But if you just want to see how it works, that's the purpose of this
video, and we can get into greater detail on another one, let us know down inside of the comments.
So you can see from this diagram here from the Kubernetes documentation itself, the only part
of this picture that is missing is in our environment, a gateway and HTTP route. Like
when we were working with ingress, in order for you to be able to make these objects, you need to
have gateway API ingress controller compatible installed inside of your cluster. That's maybe
easier said than done. But there are a lot of different third party versions out there,
you're gonna have to go with the one that works for you. So what we're looking at here is a manifest
for a gateway. So you can think of this as kind of like a router or like an entry point for incoming
traffic. First, I want to point out that gateway class name engine X would imply that, yes, there
are many different types of gateways you can write from the many different types of gateway
classes that there are, they are a third party. What we're also configuring here is that our
gateway is listening on port 80 for incoming HTTP requests. And what we're also having here is
just a little measure of security is that we're only accepting requests that are from things on
the same namespace as this particular gateway. And this is our HTTP route, which is really a lot
like the ingress manifest that we made earlier, where its ultimate goal is that it's able to direct
traffic that if it's coming into like this particular route, then it's going to be sent
on to a particular service, and then further on to a particular pod. So what we're doing here is
that we are referring back to the gateway that we made inside of the previous manifest. Our host
name is web.example.com, just as a quick throw away. And for our back end refs, ha, remember that
service engine x service, that's what we're going to be pointing to. And that's what we are going
to test and see, can we make a connection to that service through this API gateway, now that we've
created the HTTP route. So to test this, here's what we're going to do. First, I'm going to describe
the gateway service, which you'll notice is the third type of service that we discussed. This
is load balancer. So for a engine x gateway to work or any gateway, it needs to be part of a
gateway compatible ingress controller ingress controllers and therefore API gateways do sit
on top of and use load balancers. What we're going to do is a little workaround is is that I am going
to grab that node port that you see there next to port 80. So that's HTTP. And what I'm also going
to do is I'm going to grab the IP address, one of my nodes here. And then what I'm going to do is I'm
going to write out this curl command to that URL that we're looking at web.example.com. If I put
those together, and then we try that out. Nice. Learning all this stuff is hard enough. But also
trying to like get together a dependable environment to do it in, as well as you know, maybe some
really clear instructional labs that tell you what to do, as well as plenty of support, as well as
certain handsome instructors that make all sorts of really easy to follow videos, you can find all
of that. If you click on that link down inside of the description, Alt to three Academy, where you
can try us out for three days for just $3. All right, gang, I hope that helped. Make sure you
like and subscribe if you haven't. And I'll see you next time.