Kind: captions
Language: en
Hi, I am Varun Jooshi and welcome to day
38 of our certified Kubernetes
administrator 2025 course. Today we are
diving into one of the most powerful
parts of the Kubernetes API flow that is
admission controllers. These are
gatekeepers that validate or even modify
your requests before they are stored in
HCD. We will explore both builtin and
custom admission controllers. Understand
the difference between mutating and
validating web hooks. So let's get
started. What you see on screen is Sema
sends a command cubectl apply-f
pod.yamel. This essentially will create
a pod. Now sema has various
authentication methods to use and we
have discussed them in day 37. So if I
go here, Sema could either be using
certificates or she could be using
external identity providers to login
into the cluster. And it is not just a
human that will be creating resources.
Even your CI/CD pipelines will be
creating resources. In that case, bearer
tokens will be used for authentication
process. So once the request is
authenticated, then we have
authorization. And we also learned that
there are various modes of authorization
that could be used and we also learned
that arbback is the most famous one and
it is typically that you would see in
production environments. Having said
that, there are also scenarios where you
will see web hook authorization being
used and we also discussed that OPA is a
good example which can be used as a web
hook authorizer. Once the request is
authorized, we learned that the request
is stored. We learned that the object is
created and whatever is created we know
is gets stored in HCD data store. But
this is not the complete picture. There
is something that sits between
authorization and CD and that something
is configured in the API server itself
like authentication or authorization.
You configure that in the API server. If
even if you are outsourcing the
authorization part to let's say OPA then
also you are defining that configuration
in the API server and same for
authentication even if you are
outsourcing your authentication to
external identity providers. It is still
the API server that authenticates the
request. The final approval comes from
the API server. Similarly that something
that sits in between authorization and
CD it is the API server where you
configure that something called
admission control. Now firstly why do I
need admission control? While life was
hunky and dory I used to authenticate.
Authentication succeeded and then
authorization played it role and based
on that the resources were created and
as long as my request is both
authenticated and authorized I should be
good right but no the point is when you
are dealing with a production grade
implementation of Kubernetes it's not
just plain authentication and
authorization that you need you also
need something where you can define
certain policies. For example, what if
Sema is using a public image and in your
particular implementation of Kubernetes,
usage of public images is prohibited.
How do you achieve that? You have no
means of achieving that using
authentication and authorization and
using private images is one example. But
what if I want that whenever a pod is
created, there should be a sidecar
container automatically injected into
the pod. What if I wanted certain
default labels and those labels should
be available on all pods that are
running in my environment? I cannot
force that using authentication and
authorization. Hence we want something
that sits in between
authorization and CD that will ensure
that the resources that are getting
created in my cluster first it adheres
to the policies that I have set for my
cluster. Second if they are not adhering
to certain standards that I have set
that request can be denied. So admission
control is doing two things. First is if
the request is not in line with what I
have specified then admission control
can modify that request and then forward
it to CD for storage and it can also
deny or approve the request based on the
requests parameters. For example, if a
request is not specifying certain
labels, then deny that request.
Secondly, if the request doesn't have a
sidecar container, then inject that
sidecar container. So, hence admission
control can do both the things. It can
modify and it can also validate the
request. And validation involves
allowing or denying a request. Now let's
zoom in into admission control. We have
the same diagram here. What I have done
is I have expanded the admission control
part. What we discussed before is
admission control can both modify and
validate a request. So now let's see
what is happening. The first admission
control is achieved using something
called admission controllers and
admission controllers can be mutating or
they can be validating. What are
mutating admission controllers? Whenever
I hear the term mutate, I get back to a
movie I watched that is X-Men. And in
that movie, whoever had a modified DNA
when compared to human beings, they were
called mutants. And mutants had certain
special powers. Some won't age, some
could blow fire from their mouth and so
on. And hence they were called mutants
because their DNA was modified. Hence
they were called mutants. Similarly,
when I talk about Kubernetes admission
control, then the mutating admission
controller is modifying your request.
Hence, they are called mutating
admission controllers. And then
secondly, you have validating admission
controllers. What they will do is they
will see the request and based on
certain parameters or certain policies
they will either allow the request or
deny the request. As simple as that. And
mutating admission controllers are the
ones that are applied first and then the
validating admission controllers are
applied. Any doubts in this? At the very
last of this lecture, we'll be doing
admission controller sequence. So that
the concepts of who is applied first and
how it is applied, how the logic is
computated, we'll see all those things
at the very last of this lecture. Now
each admission controller be it mutating
or validating, they have certain
plugins. So if I talk about these three
that I have mentioned here, these are
called mutating admission controller
plugins. What you see here are called
validating admission controller plugins.
These are the actual plugins which are
doing the leg work for you. Now let's
discuss few examples of each of them so
that we know how these function in
Kubernetes. First is default storage
class. Now I'll take you back to day 27.
In day 27, there was a scenario when we
had multiple storage classes and we had
a PVC that specified the storage class
it is supposed to use. In this example,
persistent volume claim has specified
that it wants to use GP3 volumes. Hence
storage class that is associated with
GP3 is specified here. This part is
understood. But what if this request did
not specify any storage class? Then
there must be some way to choose a
default storage class. But if you look
at the example on the left, we have GP3
and we have IO1. And none of these
manifests are supplying this
information. Storage class Kubernetes io
is default class true. Now let's say in
our example this was specified in GP3.
If this was specified in GP3 and if
there were a request that was omitting
this field altogether then by default a
GP3 PV was created. And why was that? It
was because I have specified that this
storage class is the default storage
class. And who is making that happen? If
your request does not have the storage
class name that who is the one who is
adding the default storage class here it
is the mutating admission controller.
Hence the first one is default storage
class. So this plug-in what it will do
is if you have not specified any storage
class but you have also defined a
default storage class then it will
automatically associate the PVC with the
default storage class. Then there is
default toleration seconds. This is
let's say when you apply a taint that
has an effect of no execute that implies
that whatever pods are running on that
node will automatically be terminated.
But for applications a abrupt shutdown
is not recommended. You should allow
applications enough time to gracefully
shut down. Hence you have default
toleration seconds and this timer allows
I think 5 minutes by default for a pod
to gracefully terminate. If it doesn't
terminate even then then only it is
forcefully terminated from that node.
And if you want to learn more about
these things I would recommend you watch
day 22. In day 22, we discussed pod life
cycle, pod termination and all these
things in detail. So now let's go back
to day 38 again. The third one is
default ingress class. So we have not
discussed ingress yet but I want you to
have a highle understanding. So whenever
you are implementing let's say a
kubernetes cluster be on premises or in
the cloud you have options to have
multiple ingress controllers. For
example, if I am on let's say Amazon
EKS, I could be using haroxy as well. I
could be using AWS's ALB and I could
also be using EngineX for example. But
when I'm creating an ingress object, but
my ingress object is not specifying the
load balancer that I would want to use.
If my request has not specified whether
I want to use ALB, harroxy or engine X,
then default ingress class will
associate my ingress with the default
ingress controller and that default
ingress controller I first must be
specifying like we did for storage
class. In storage class we said that
this is the default storage class.
Similarly, when you have multiple
ingress controllers, you specify that
this is the ingress controller that I
want to be default. And once you do
that, whenever you are creating any
ingress resources that are not
specifying ingress controllers, then the
default ingress will be associated with
that ingress. So what we understood from
this is why are these mutating? These
are mutating because they are modifying
the actual request in some way. Hence,
these are called mutating admission
controller plugins. Now, let's discuss
First is node restrictions. So, we know
that all our nodes are running cublets.
If I have let's say worker node one, I
would want the cublet that is associated
with worker node one shall only be
performing actions in worker node one
and the pods that are running in worker
node one nowhere else. Hence this node
restriction plug-in ensures that the
cubelet can only modify the node on
which it is running and the pods in that
node. You would be asking but Vun why
would cubelet in worker node one be
playing with let's say worker node 2 or
pods in worker node 2 it is not always
kubernetes for example let's say if your
worker node gets hacked then you do not
want the hacker to have control of the
cublet and also perform actions in other
nodes. So hence it is imperative that
you have things in place you have
admission control in place which will
prohibit that behavior. Hence node
restriction plug-in will prohibit cublet
from performing any actions in any other
node but in the node in which it is
running. Next is resource kota. So what
happens is when you have let's say a
production namespace and production
namespace let's say has been given a
resource kota that this nameace cannot
be using more than 50 GB of memory and
24 vCPUs. If the prod name space is
already using 50GBs and 24 vCPUs, then
if there is a new request that wants
some memory or some vCPU, then that
request will be denied because the
resource kota has been exhausted. Third
one I want to discuss is namespace life
cycle. So if let's say a namespace does
not exist and we have seen this before
when we were creating resources and
namespace didn't exist we used to
receive an error that the namespace does
not exist. Hence it is the namespace
life cycle plug-in that is working under
the hood and ensuring users cannot
create resources in the name spaces that
do not exist. And second, it also has
one more important functionality. If a
namespace is undergoing termination, for
example, then it will disallow anyone
from creating resources in the
terminating namespace. That's pretty
self-explanatory. Now, these plugins
that we have just discussed are purely
mutating that is they are modifying
something or they are purely validating.
they are allowing or denying a request
based on certain parameters. But there
are also admission controller plugins
that are both mutating and validating.
Enlighten me. The first one is limit
range. So I'll go to my GitHub notes. In
day 19, we learned about limit range.
And why were we using limit range? We
were using limit range to ensure the
pods that do not specify requests and
limits. They can have certain defaults
and you can set this for CPU, memory and
other resources as well. So here in this
YAML we have set a default request and
limit for both CPU and memory. Here are
our limits and here are our requests. So
whenever there is a request that does
not define requests or limits then this
admission controller plug-in that is
limit ranger will add those and we have
seen this behavior in our demo when we
defined this any request that were not
specifying requests and limits these
requests and limits that we have defined
as defaults were automatically injected.
We saw that but Wun mutation part is
fine. I understand that limit range is
performing that. But what about
validating? What is it validating? So if
I go here, we also defined a max and
minimum. Here we said that if a request
is specifying more than four vCPUs or
more than 8 GB bytes of memory then that
request should not be catered because
this is the maximum a pod can specify.
If a pod specifies CPU and memory beyond
this number then the request is
rejected. And who is the one that is
rejecting that request? It is our
beloved limit range validation
controller plug-in. Hence, limit ranger
acts as both mutating and validating
admission controller plug-in. Then there
is always pull images. So let's go to
day 22. So in day 22 we learned about
image pool policy and we also learned
that these policies are container level.
So each container can have its own image
pool policy. That part is fine but what
I want you to concentrate on we learned
certain defaults as well. So for
example, if you are not specifying any
tag for your image that implies you are
using the latest tag, then the image
pull policy defaults to always. That's
understood. Second, if you are
specifying a tag, then the image pull
policy defaults to if not present. Now
let's see why understanding this is
important to understand this concept.
Always pull images. What this will do is
if you have set the policy to if not
present or anything else, it will roll
it back to always. Hence, no matter if
the image is cached or not cached, it
will always pull images. Okay, that is
the mutating part. Vun, if I have
specified if not present, it will roll
it back to always. So, Vun, the first
part that is mutating that I understand.
If I have specified if not present, it
will change it back to always. Or even
if you if I have specified never, it
will change it back to always. So what
is the validation part? It validates
credentials. Credentials for what? If
you are pulling images from a private
registry then all the containers that
are running should have some sort of
authentication associated with them so
that they can pull the images from
private registries. Now if you do not
have always as the image pull policy
then the image will be cached and even
the containers that do not have access
to private registries can use that image
because if the image is locally
available then the credentials will not
be used to pull the image from the
private registry. Hence this plug-in
helps in two things. First is it ensures
that image is always pulled. Now always
pulled as in you could also have a tag
or you could also have latest but
whatever you have the image will always
be pulled from the registry be it
private or be it public. And the second
benefit that it gives you is it
disallows containers who do not have
access to that private registry or that
image to use that image. Hence you stop
malicious behavior of containers where
they are taking advantage of cached
images. Third one is service account. So
what is the mutating part? Mutating part
is we have created so many containers
and all the time we have not specified
any service account that is to be used.
But as we have understood in our last
lecture where we discussed service
accounts that the default service
account is automatically mounted onto
our pods and who is doing that this is
done by the mutating part of the service
account plug-in. But what is the
validation part Von? Now let's say if
you have deleted the default service
account then that request will error
out. That implies for your custom
service accounts as well. If the custom
account that you have specified does not
exist then also the request will error
out. Warun everything is fine until now
but always pull images. You said that
whatever I have configured for my
containers it will change that and it
will default to always. But in
production I have never seen this
behavior. If I write if not present then
if not present is what is used. Then how
can you say this? That brings me to a
very important point and that is this
one. Some enabled by default. So we have
talked about many plugins but some of
them are enabled by default and some of
them are disabled and out of these all
of these are enabled by default except
always pull image. Hence you see that
behavior if you have supplied if not
present. If not present is the one which
is used for pulling your container
images. But if you want you can enable
this as well. And how do we enable this?
We'll see this in the next part.
Validating admission control can allow
deny. So mutating admission controllers
cannot deny anything. They are just
modifying the requests. The denying and
allowing capability is only with
validating admission controllers. Now
let's move to the next diagram.
admission controller. So we have good
understanding of admission controllers.
We also have understanding about
mutating and validating admission
controllers. Now that we have this
understanding, I want to introduce the
entire hierarchy and how it works. At
the very top, we have admission
controllers and then admission
controllers can be of two types. First
is built-in admission controllers. These
come along with your Kubernetes cluster.
So when you configure your Kubernetes
cluster, these are already available at
your disposal. Then there are custom
admission controllers. Built-in
admission controllers can be classified
into three. Mutating, validating, and
dual function. We have seen all three.
Then custom admission controller as the
name implies are custom. They are not
inbuilt. They do not come by default
with your Kubernetes installation. You
either have an external tool do this for
you which are often called policy
engines and you might have heard of
popular policy engines like OPA combined
with gatekeeper and Kyberno is also a
good choice. Then you have organization
specific. Now let's say whatever
requirements you have cannot be
fulfilled by what is readily available
in the market then you can write your
own admission controllers. Now let's
discuss what we have here. All these in
white, the plugins in white we have
already discussed. So I will not jump
onto those. I only want to discuss
mutating admission web hook and
validating admission web hook. I want
you to understand one thing. If you have
custom admission controllers in your
cluster, then how do you call those
custom admission controllers? you need
some mechanism via which you can call
those custom admission controllers and
that is where these come into play. So
whenever the request warrants something
to be checked outside something to be
checked outside of the built-in
admission controllers then it is the
mutating admission web hook that calls
that custom admission controller for
validation. It is the validating
admission web hook that calls the custom
admission controller. So these two
built-in plugins they are builtin and
these built-in plugins are used to call
the custom admission controller plugins.
They act as a bridge to invoke custom
admission controllers like OPA, Kyverno,
Gatekeeper which are implemented as web
hook servers. Now what is a web hook? In
very simple terms, web hook is an HTTP
call back mechanism that allows one
system to notify or request another
system in real time when a specific
event occurs. Warun in English please.
You have a GitHub repository. Let's say
you commit something there and as soon
as you commit something, your Jenkins
pipeline runs. How is that possible?
That is possible because of a web hook.
Whenever you commit, a web hook is
triggered and that web hook intimates
Jenkins to run your CI/CD pipeline. So
this is a web hook. In Kubernetes, web
hooks enable the API server to invoke
external services during admission
requests. And what are those external
services? Those external services are
our custom admission controllers. So
Kubernetes says, "Hey external service,
before I accept this request, do you
want to approve, reject or modify this
request, modify, mutation, allow or deny
validation?" As simple as that. And if
you have any confusions about this right
now, we'll understand this in deeper
details in our sequencing part. Let's
move down. What is a web hook? We have
seen that custom admission controllers
typically run as deployment. So if you
are using OPA, gatekeeper, Kyberno, so
they or even if you have your
organization specific custom admission
controller, then they will essentially
be running as deployments. They run
inside your cluster but in extremely
rare scenarios you could also see them
running outside your cluster. Then how
do I enable admission controller
plugins? Enable admission plugins is
used to enable them. Disable admission
plugins are used to disable them. Let's
go to our API server and check what are
enabled by default and what are disabled
by default. So let's go to my terminal.
I will run docker ps because I have a
kind implementation of kubernetes. I
will run docker
exec to have an integrated terminal. And
the container I want to login is this
one which is acting as my control plane
node in Kubernetes. And then I want to
run again shell which is bash. I'll
press enter. Oh, I'm not in Kubernetes.
I should not add double hyphens. I'll
press enter. And now I am in my cluster
control plane node. We know that API
server runs as a static pod in cube ADM
deployments. If you have any other
implementation where you are running
control plane as systemd service then
you will have to find these options in
the unit file of your service. So I will
run let's cd into this cdc kubernetes
and then manifest. I'll press enter. ls
here are all my four control plane
components whose static pod manifest can
be found here. So I will what I will do
is I'll vim into cube API server. I see
enable admission plugins here. But Vun
when we were discussing here you said
that all these except always pull images
are enabled by default. But I only see
node restriction. Why is that? What
happens is by default in Kubernetes code
itself in API servers code itself some
plugins are enabled by default. So I
would urge you to check out the
documentation. The link for the
documentation can be found in my GitHub
notes. See that and you will see most of
the plugins that are enabled by default
are in the code itself in the API
servers code itself. So hence you do not
see them mentioned here. But Vun I if I
want to disable any of those how do I do
that? As we saw just now what you can do
is you can add this disable flag and
then those plugins can be disabled. And
I do not want you to believe me blindly.
So let's do one thing. I will copy this.
I will add it to my API server. I'll hit
insert and then I will add this one
here. And what is that I want to
disable? I want to disable service
account. And if I disable this, the
behavior that I should see is the
service account that is the default
service account is not automounted onto
my containers. So let's first do one
thing before I apply this change. I'll
clear my screen in this window. I'll
zoom in this a little. I will again
clear my screen. I will run cubectl run
my pod. And I want to use the engineext
image for this one. It says the pod is
created. If I run cubectl describe pods
and my pod then I will see that there is
a mount and that mount is for the
service account and that service account
is mapped in this location. This part is
fine and not exactly this location will
have the service account but this
location will have the name space token
and the certificate file. We saw that in
our previous lecture. So if you have any
confusions about service accounts do
watch that. So this mount is happening
because the service account admission
controller plug-in is in action which is
mapping the default service account. And
if I scroll up a little I should also
see that the default service account is
mapped here. Service account is mapped
and the name of that service account is
default. Now let's apply this changes
and as soon as I apply this I just want
to check the name is it service account
or service accounts it's just service
account I'll just save this file and as
soon as I make modifications in this we
know that the cube API server is
restarted so if I run cubectl get pods
let's run it here as well let's run it
here itself if I run cubectl get oh I'll
exit from here and then I will and
cubectl get pods. The command should
take some time because the API server is
restarting right now. Hence, let's allow
this some time. It is saying busy. So,
let's me do one thing. I'll add hyphen n
cube system. Let's again run this
command. My API server is in pending
state right now. So, let's add a hyphen
w. This will watch this and refresh this
screen every 2 seconds. So now we see
that the API server is in running state.
Now let's create another pod. Now I will
run
cubectl run my pod 2 and the image I
want to use is engine x. Now it says my
pod 2 is created. Now I want to run a
describe on my pod 2. If I press enter
you see there are no mounts here. And if
I scroll up there is no service account
here. Hence now you know for sure that
there are certain plugins that are
enabled by default and you can use that
disable flag. If you want to disable
that admission controller plug-in I hope
you understand this part. Now what I
want to do is I want to revert it to its
original state the API server. So I will
again exec here and then I will vim at C
kubernetes manifest. I want to modify
the cube API server. I'll go here and I
will completely remove this disable
admission plugins. It is removed. I will
press escape shift zz to save this. I'll
exit this. Now the API server would be
restarting. So let's go back to our
diagrams. So we have understood how to
disable or enable these plugins as per
your requirement and enable plug-in was
always there. You can add comma and add
whatever you want to add there. Now
let's see what we have next. I want to
cover a certain part that we briefly
covered in day 35. Day 35 we discussed
authorization modes and I want to
correlate that with admission control
and I want to take an example of OPA
here. So first let me explain this
diagram. If you have watched day 35 this
will make a lot of sense to you and if
you have not watched it I would request
you to watch that. So we have Sema here
and Sema is applying a podium. we have
the API server which is performing the
authentication part and since it was an
authorization lecture we were zooming in
into the authorization part. So whenever
we talk about authorization here
authorization modes are also configured
in the API server and this is the flag
and here what we are saying is first is
node authorizer then go to the web hook
then go to the arbback and we discussed
this scenario based on the point that we
have two requirements. First is
authorizer will check whether sema has
permissions to create the pod and
secondly the policy only if image comes
from registry.pinkco company.com. So
only allow Sema to create the pod if the
image registry from where the image is
coming is registry.pinkco paying
company.com and we said that this can be
achieved using just a web hook or this
can be achieved with a combination of
web hook and arbback. So there was an
oversight from my end in this lecture.
Achieving this part is not possible by
just the usage of web hook authorizer.
we will require admission control here
and in this particular part I want to
explain how that works so that all
doubts are clarified. So let's say Sema
runs this command cubectl apply
fpod.yamel API server authenticates then
for authorization part it checks this
authorization mode flag and then in this
sequence the authorization happens.
First it will come to node. Node each
authorizer that you specify here can
either allow the request, deny the
request or it can say no opinion. Only
if no opinion is given then only the
request moves to the next step. If it
allows or denies then the evaluation
stops right there. It is not moved to
the next one. So here node since this is
used by cublet it says no opinion. then
the request goes to the OPA web hook
authorization. So this web hook
authorizer will say no opinion. Now OPA
web hook authorization will check
whether the request meets certain
parameters or not and those parameters
we'll see in detail and next it moves to
arbback. RBback says okay allows this
request because Sema is allowed to
create a pod that this part is fine and
then it moves to admission control and
we discussed in this lecture that
admission control sits between
authorization and HCD. So once it goes
to OPA admission control, we are using
OPA gatekeeper as our custom admission
controller. OPA will check whether the
request is from registry.pinkco
company.com and based on that it will
allow or deny that request. Let's say
Sema specified registry.pink company.com
as the place from where the image is
being fetched. then OPA will also
approve this request and then the pod
object will be created. So this is the
usual flow. But I want to discuss few
points about OPA when it is used as a
web hook authorizer. Firstly OPA is open
policy agent. You can use it in two
stages of your API flow. You can use it
as a web hook authorization and we
learned in day 35 that one of the
authorization modes is web hook. You can
use it as web hook. Secondly, you can
also use as an admission controller. The
diagram that you see here right now uses
OPA for both
authorization and for admission control.
Now let's see what is happening. OPA as
web hook authorizer. So these points are
for this particular part of this diagram
cannot see the whole request body only
sees user group service account verb
resource name space and this is what
arbback also sees. But Vun, if Arbback
also sees what OPA as a web hook
authorizer is seeing, then why would I
use both web hook and arbback? I can
just use arbback and get away. But there
are some unique features that OPA
provides when it is used as a web hook
authorizer and those features are
timebased access. So for example, I will
only authorize the request after 6:00
p.m. because I do not want to perform
any changes during production hours.
This is just an example. Second is
network aware checks only these ciders
when the request is coming from these
ciders these subnets only then I will
allow that request. So these features
are unique to OPA. That's why some
highly secure
environments may use OPA as well in the
authorization part. Now next is why use
OPA as web hook authorizer or any
external web hook authorizer in
production early rejection. So the
request will not even reach admission
control and the request will be rejected
right here. That's one use case. Second
is centralized access decisions. Now
imagine if you are dealing with one
cluster then creating arbback policies
for one cluster is fine but if you are
running hundreds of clusters multiple
clusters then you want to centralize all
these policies and this
centralization can be provided by OPA.
So what you can have is you can create a
central server which takes care of all
authorization. Next one is typically
used in high security environments or
multicluster deployments like we just
saw. So I hope this clarifies that the
requirements were two in day 35. First
one was to create pods and second one
was to only allow images from this
registry. So the first part is
permissions that can be achieved by
using arbback or OPA. You could be using
OPA if you also want these features. And
there are few more features. You can
check the GitHub notes or online to see
what are those features and then you can
also use arbback. Understand that until
and unless OPA gives no opinion request
will not be moved to arbback
authorization. So what you could see is
OPA is just checking these two things.
For example, the request is coming after
6 p.m. and the request is coming from a
specific cider which is allowed and then
arbback could be performing the actual
role based access control based on these
parameters. That's one scenario. But now
what I want to discuss is until and
unless this gives no opinion it will not
move to arbback. So if OPA is fine with
it, let's say if OPA says okay it's time
based access and it is network aware
checks all things are fine it is after 6
p.m. and the cider is also allowed then
OPA will not give allow it will give no
opinion only then request will move to
arbback which will further check whether
sema is allowed to perform these actions
or not actions that are defined in the
verb and the resources that are defined
in her resource section. Now I want to
show you what you will see in actual
production implementations. So here we
do not have web hook as authorizer. We
just have the defaults. Here we have
node and then we have arbback. And in
the admission control we have OPA and
gatekeeper. So here is the flow that you
will see in production. We have already
discussed these things in detail. what
is admission control and how it happens.
But here I wanted to give you some
example policies that you could be
using. So only allow images from this
registries. Containers must not run as
root. All pods must have team and dev
labels. Now see so this one will be
achieved via validation admission
controller plug-in. Containers must not
run as root. This again will be covered
by validating admission controller. This
all pods must have team and dev label.
Again validating inject default labels
if missing. This is mutating admission
controller. I hope you understand this
part. Now lastly I want to discuss
admission controller sequence. This is
the last part of this lecture and this
will connect everything together. So
authentication and authorization. Let's
say API server is taking care of that.
Then we have admission control that sits
between authorization and CD. So first
Sema hits cube cuddle apply fbot.l API
server authenticates and authorizes the
request. It now reaches the mutating
admission controllers. Understand that
it is always mutating admission
controllers that take effect first. So
once mutating admission controllers have
modified the request that modified
object is not yet persisted in HCD those
changes are still in memory then all the
validating admission controllers will
verify that request and if validating
admission controller denies then the
request will be denied with an error. If
validation controller allows then the
request will be allowed to be stored
incd. Another important point that I
should have mentioned initially itself
admission control only applies to write
operations. So your create modify patch.
So when you run these operations only
then admission control controllers are
used. And whenever you are thinking of
admission controllers, think of them
from HCD's perspective. If a request
will be writing something to HCD or
modifying something in HCD or patching
something in HCD, then that request will
go through admission control. But if a
request is just getting the object,
listing the objects, then that request
will not go through admission control.
Hence only requests that are right
specific that are modifying some data or
creating new data only those requests
will go through admission control. Now
that we understand the sequence let's
take an example. So let's say you have
enabled all these and let's see how
these will work. First is namespace life
cycle. We know that this is validating
so this will be skipped. Second is limit
ranger. We know this is a dual function
admission controller plug-in. Hence only
the mutating part will be applied first
not the validating part. So mutating
part will say okay uh Sema has not
specified requests and limits. Let me
modify her request. Then the request
will go to service account. Service
account admission controller plug-in
again has two functionalities mutating
and validating. But only the mutating
part will be applied here because we
know mutating admission controllers
apply first then the service account
will be mapped. Let's say it was the
default service account. Then we are
saying mutating admission web hook. Here
the request will go to our custom
admission controller. Custom admission
controller let's say wants to inject a
sidecar container which is there for
logging. So it will inject that
container and that container could also
be for a service mesh like that is the
job of mutating admission web hook. This
is just mutating the request adding new
container to my request because these
admission controllers can see the full
body of the request. Then I have
validating admission web hook. This will
also be skipped because this is a
validating admission controller. Then we
have resource kota. Resource kota is
also validating. Hence this will also be
skipped. So in this entire plugins only
limit ranger service account and
mutating admission web hook were applied
and whatever changes they did whatever
mutation they performed all of that was
stored in memory nothing was persisted
incd now that they have run now comes
the turn of validating admission
controller namespace life cycle will say
okay the namespace exists limit ranger
it dual function plug-in. So it will say
oh yeah the maximums for the limit range
object are adhered by sema. So I am
fine. Then the request will go to
service account. Service account will
say okay the service account she that I
am about to map exists. So my validation
is also fine. This will not come into
picture because this was already
applied. Then the validation admission
web hook. This will check whether let's
say for example the image is from a
private registry then this will also say
okay I am also fine then the request
will go to the request kota request kota
will say the kota in the name space in
which sema wants to create a pod is fine
and her request can be moved ahead and
at this stage both mutating and
validating ing plugins are fine with the
request. So the request is allowed and
then it gets stored incd. If any of the
validating admission controller plugins
would have denied this request, then the
request would have been denied. I think
that's all I wanted to cover. That wraps
up day 38 on admission controllers. Now
you know how Kubernetes can not only
authenticate and authorize requests but
also enforce custom policies before
anything even touches the cluster. In
day 39, we will shift gears and look at
custom resource definitions or CRDs. If
you have any questions, feel free to ask
them in the comment section and I will
reply. If this helped, do consider
liking, sharing and subscribing. It will
mean a lot to me.