Kind: captions
Language: en
What's up everyone? My name is Jessica
Dean and I'm a senior cloud advocate at
Azure. Today we're going to go hands-on
with Helm 3. Now, before we dive right
on in, I want to do a quick recap of
what our agenda is. First, we're going
to start off with talking about why
Helm, what problem does Helm solve, and
why did we need to update it from Helm 2
to Helm 3? Then, we're going to go
through and review what Helm 3 actually
is, what was needed to happen to make
Helm 3 possible. We're going to talk
about some breaking changes or some
things you should be aware of as you
plan to move from Helm 2 to Helm 3.
We're also going to talk about some new
features and we're going to talk on how
you can actually migrate your Helm 2
release over into a Helm 3 release. At
the end, we're going to wrap all of this
up and we're going to focus on how you
can get involved, how you can get
started with Helm 3 and how you can get
involved with the Helm community as a
whole. So, first off, Helm is the de
facto package manager for Kubernetes. It
is the absolute best way to find, share,
and use software that is specifically
built for Kubernetes.
In fact, it helps you manage your
complexity. It helps you do easy
updates. You can very simply share your
charts and you can have chart
dependencies and you even can take
advantage of the hell roll back command
to roll back to previous releases. Now,
a lot of these things, if you've already
been using Helm for a while, you're
probably familiar with this. In fact,
you've probably seen a slide exactly
like this. But what you might not know
is a major announcement that we made
just about 4 weeks ago. Helm actually
graduated from what was called the CNCF,
CloudNative Cloud Foundation. So what
that means is there's actually quite a
few requirements to become a graduated
project. First, it has to prove that
it's ready for the mainstream majority.
In order to do this, it has to prove
stability, security, healthy governance,
and it has to have a strong community,
which as you will see throughout our
journey of talking about Helm and how
Helm 3 came to be, we definitely have.
On top of that, there's a certification
test that is required to make sure that
it meets these standards. And we didn't
just pass, we passed with flying colors.
We scored a 198% on the certification
test. And the final signoff was for the
CNCF or cloudnative cloud foundation
technical committee to vote by
supermajority to make Helm a top level
project. This was a huge win for the
Helm project. And if you've been
hesitant about trying out Helm because
of security concerns or Helm 3 was still
in alpha or beta stage, it has been in G
now for quite some time. But this
graduation step now makes it even extra
ready for you to make that jump. and
we're going to walk you through how you
can do that. First, let's talk about
version three and how it actually came
to be and what it is. First off, version
three is based on your feedback. It's
based on the community. It's based on
the best practices that we heard from
the community, the different use cases,
productionbased use cases. We wanted to
dramatically simplify the way we were
approaching architecture in Helm 2 and
we followed through with that in Helm 3.
So you'll see throughout our review and
our demos that security has now been
made an absolute priority. And since we
know that Helm 3 graduated and one of
the requirements was proving security,
that investment in making security a
priority really paid off. So right now
before I show you a ton more slides,
this is a hands-on session. I want to go
hands-on with Helm 3 and show you how
easy it is to get started. You don't
have to leave Helm 2, though you can if
you want to, but you can have Helm 2 and
Helm 3 installed right alongside each
other on your system. So, let's go into
a demo and go hands-on. All right, so
I'm going to use Brew to install Helm
because I'm on a Mac. So, I'll just do
brew install Helm, and that's going to
give me the latest up-to-date version of
Helm 3, which at the time of this video
is 3.2.1. If I wanted Helm 2, I could
still use brew. I just do brew install
Helm at 2 and that's going to give me
the most up-to-date release of Helm 2
which is 2.16.7.
Now I also wrote a script that will set
up Helm 3 for you and it'll actually
give you an alias called H3. So you can
see I'm just doing H3 version and then
there's the same version 3.2.1 and I
have Helm 3 sidebyside actual Helm. Now,
let's go into another demo where we're
going to show you how to use the same
exact commands, but in a use case that
we were accustomed to with Helm 2.
First, I'm going to show you that Helm
version and H3 version works exactly the
same way as it did in our install. Now,
let's go ahead and try to do some list
commands. First, Helm list is going to
list all of my Helm 2 releases. You can
see I have about four. Now, if I were to
do H3 LS, you're going to see I have
again a handful of releases. Only that
was to the default namespace. If I want
to see all of my Helm 3 namespaces or
releases, I need to put d-all
namespaces. You can see there's
significantly more. Now, let's go ahead
and try to switch over to a local
cluster. We're going to try to run some
install commands. So, the first thing is
let's go ahead and try to install an
enginex chart. This is pretty standard
enginex ingress and you can see that it
actually can't download. Now this is
very specific because I don't have the
stable repo added in to my Helm 3
instance by default. It's no longer
added. So you actually have to use helm
repo add stable and then give it the
stable URL.
Once you do that it's going to work
exactly as you would expect.
Stable has now been added to your
repositories. And now I could do helm
repo ls and I see the stable repository.
Now let's go ahead and actually try to
rerun that enginex ingress command. And
remember we're running it against the
name space we're working in which is
default.
And so that worked great. Now let's go
ahead and see the pods that we have in
the same name space. You can see that
engine x is working. One container is
kind of running but not ready. Now one
container is running and ready and the
other one is still waiting to become
ready. Obviously I'm running this on
Docker desktop with Kubernetes so it
might never get ready. Now let's try to
install Jenkins only this time we're
going to install it into a specific
nameace called Jenkins. This namespace
doesn't actually exist.
And you can see that by the error that
it failed to create the namespace
Jenkins. Instead we actually have to
create the namespace in advance. And
then we can go ahead and rerun the
upgrade install command.
There we go. And now Jenkins properly
installed.
So if I do another ls, you're only going
to see engine x as the default because
the list command is only querying
against the default namespace. Instead,
if I wanted to use all namespaces, I
would see engine x and jenkins or I
could use the dash jenkins. This works
pretty much identical to how we would
use cube control, cubectl, or just the
letter k. Now I can uninstall the
releases the exact same way I would,
only this time I'm going to use H3
uninstall. No longer delete- purge, and
we'll talk about that. So you can see
I'm now cleaning up. I've removed Engine
X and I've removed Jenkins.
All right, so now that we got to see
that Helm 3 still works pretty much the
same way that we would expect, even
though Tiller is now removed, and we'll
talk about that in just a few slides.
Now, let's go ahead and talk about what
was required to make that a reality.
First off, some people don't know that
Helm is almost as old as Kubernetes.
Kubernetes actually came out in May of
2014. And Helm was the child, so to
speak, of a hackathon project at a
company called Deis. Microsoft acquired
Deis a few years ago, but the hackathon,
I think, took place around October of
2015. So note that it's only a year and
a half younger than Kubernetes, but it
predates some very specific security
related features. For example, it
predates CRDs or custom resource
definitions in Kubernetes. It also
predates arbback which is role-based
access control. So by the end of Helm 2,
we were kind of tacking on all these
security concerns. We had tiller and we
made service accounts and then you would
have cluster role bindings and you'd
have to kind of jump through a lot of
hoops. As a result, with Helm 3, we made
it simpler. We made it more secure and
we really focused on production and what
our community was doing in production.
We also chose to make Helm more
Kubernetes native. So that would add to
the dramatic simplification. First off,
it inherits security controls directly
from cube config. So you don't have to
go out and set up a service account and
do helm and knit. Helmmannit is actually
gone. You don't have to worry about
cluster ro bindings and create an
account or creating a special namespace
for tiller. Instead you can use the
kubernetes arbback to limit access and
resources. So whatever access your
system or your build system has to the
kubernetes cluster that you run in
production or dev test QA that's going
to be the same level access that Helm
has. Finally, we also opt to replace
custom APIs for charts and deployments
with secrets. And we'll talk about
secrets in a few more slides. Now, we've
already kind of touched on this. This
isn't a secret. In fact, we made the
announcement at KubeCon in Europe about
a year ago now, but tiller is no more.
In fact, previously when you would use
Helm 2, the way that everything worked
is that you would have your Kubernetes
manifest or your Kubernetes JSON, your
Helm chart, and you would bundle all of
that up and use Helm upgrade install or
just Helm install and tiller would be
sitting in your cluster either in the
coupube system namespace or whichever
namespace you deployed tiller to. It
would take that deployment and then it
would hand it off to the Kubernetes API.
As a result, the way that things work in
Helm 3 is it's actually using the
Kubernetes API directly. So, we remove
the mediator. And fun fact about this is
I don't think I've ever heard any
community cheer as loudly for the
removal of a feature from a product as
we did when we announced that tiller was
going to finally be gone. As a result of
removing T tiller, now Helm is simpler.
It is significantly more flexible from
an architectural standpoint, but that
was part of the reason how come we had
to do the major refactor. It gave us
greater security because we're not
having to manage security for tiller and
the namespace and whatever cluster role
binding you created. Now you're just
communicating with the default arbback
permissions and API from Kubernetes. And
as a result, it also makes it easier for
future upgrades. Now, one of the ways
that this works is it's actually
rendering your charts client side and it
stores the release history on the
server. So, I'll show you where you can
see the release markers. They actually
get stored as secrets now. Previously,
they were stored as config maps in
whichever namespace till Tiller was it
lived in. And we'll talk about some of
those changes in the release metadata
very shortly. Now, one of the other big
benefits of removing Tiller specifically
from an architectural standpoint is it
actually lowered the barrier of entry
for contributors because it's a much
simpler code base for people to
contribute to submit PRs or just joining
part of the team.
Now, let's talk about some of the
changes, specifically the CLI changes.
We really tried to make it more native
and more natural in listening to how our
community is using it. So for example,
previously if I wanted to delete a
release that was deployed, I could do
helm delete and the name of the release,
but that would keep the history on the
server and keep the history in record.
If I wanted to delete the history, I
would have to do d-purge.
Now that behavior with d-purge is the
default. So helm delete has become helm
uninstall and d-purge is no more. If I
wanted to keep the history, I could
override the default behavior and use
d-keep.
Helm inspect has become Helm show. Helm
fetch has become Helm pull and Helm
search has become Helm search repo as
opposed to Helm search hub. So again
just really trying to make it more
native and more intuitive. Now there are
some breaking changes and really I want
to focus on this but with the emphasis
of don't worry. We still tend to support
Helm 2 charts and you should be able and
we use should with air quotes just
because there's a few things you have to
be aware of. But you should be able to
replace the Helm 2 binary with the Helm
3 binary so long as you take the
following considerations into account.
First off, there were some changes with
how we handled namespaces. Previously in
Helm 2, if I did Helm install Jenkins
stable/jenkins for the Jenkins chart,
that would go that would deploy out into
whatever namespace I was already in.
Right? So that if I'm in default, that
would go out to default. But if I added
d-namespace
my new namespace and my new namespace
didn't exist, Helm 2 would go out and
create that and then release it. Helm 3
doesn't work that way. Instead, it's no
longer going to create a namespace
automatically. you will have to create
the namespace first and then run the
Helm install command. Now, that's really
important to consider if you're using
Helm in your CI/CD pipelines and you're
expecting the namespace to be created.
You're going to have to provision your
CI/CD pipeline to create that namespace
in advance prior to your Helm step. Some
other changes focus around release
metadata. So, the metadata is now stored
in the same namespace that you release
your deployment out to. So if I deploy
Jenkins over into the default namespace,
my release metadata will be stored in
default. If I release it over into my
new namespace, the release metadata will
be stored in my new namespace. This is
different because in Helm 2, we
previously had all of that release
metadata in cube system as a config map
object. Now templated resources with
namespaces set explicitly set with that-
namespace flag are going to be installed
into that set namespace. So if I say
deploy Jenkins to my new namespace, but
I do a Helm ls command, I'm not going to
see that deployment unless I use d-all
namespaces. Pretty much this last bullet
point really means that Helm operates
more similar to how Kubernetes operates.
If I do k get pods, it's going to show
me the pods for whatever namespace
versus k get pods explicitly say dashn
and then get whatever namespace.
Hopefully we're following each other.
Great. So now let's talk about CRDs
because we have made some pretty big
changes actually to CRDs as well. First
off, the CRD-install
is now ignored in Helm 3. There will be
useful warning messages if CRDs are
present still in your template
directory, but we have replaced that
with a CRD's directory that's actually
at the chart route. So, let me show you
what that looks like. Let's say that you
had the chronabs chart and you have your
normal chart yaml, your templates file.
You probably have a values.yaml. Now,
you're going to have a CRDs folder with
your CRDs within that subdirectory.
We also made some changes to chart
dependency and how we handle chart
dependency management. The old style is
we would have a requirements YAML and
requirements lock. But the new style is
we now have a chart YAML and a chart
lock. Now this will be considered a
breaking change if you use H dependency
subcomands. So this is something to be
aware of as you plan your migration
again from Helm 2 to Helm 3. Now I keep
talking about the release metadata and
some of the namespace changes. Well,
remember that even though the release
metadata is getting stored now in
whatever namespace you deploy it, the
metadata object itself is also
different. As I've mentioned, it was
previously stored as a config map. Now,
it is stored as a secret and it's again
stored as a secret in whichever name
space the release is. So, it's double
base 64 encoded, which means you could
decode it if you want to. You just do
base 64 decode. But as a result, with
this in mind, it is not cap backwards
compatible. Helm 3 releases are not
backwards compatible with Helm 2 release
metadata. Instead, you can go from Helm
2 over to three. We have a plugin to
help with that, and I'll show you a
demo. You can check out the plugin at
github.com/helm/helm23.
And the one more thing I really wanted
to touch on was some deprecated
functions. We had a lot of customers
using release time, but that has now
been deprecated in favor of the now
function. And the reason for that is it
actually gives you some greater control
over date and time format. One more
thing I think I believe the I said the
last thing was one more thing, but this
is I believe the last one is the
d-generate name. So previously in Helm
2, you would you didn't have to specify
name. You could do a helm install stable
Jenkins and Helm would suggest a name
like dancing penguin or fuzzy panda and
it would give you those fun cute names.
But because we're really trying to make
sure that Helm 3 focuses on production
use cases, instead you now have to give
it a name. So if I want to deploy
Jenkins, I would say Helm install
Jenkins stable Jenkins for the the name
of the chart. Or if I still wanted the
old behavior, I could use the d-generate
name flag. If I don't specify a name or
I don't use this flag, then I will get
an error. So now I want to show you a
demo of how to use the Helm 2 to3 m
migration or the plugin to actually
migrate a Helm 2 release over into Helm
3.
All right, so we're going to start off
with installing the plugin. We just do
Helm plugin install and then we give it
Helm 2 to 3 the GitHub address. Now
notice that we are doing this with Helm
V2 because we're going from V2 to V3.
Now that we have the plug-in installed,
I'm going to do a helm lls. So we can
see a list of the v2 helm releases. So
you can see that I have a deployment
codefresh-croc-dev.
Now that release does not exist in h3s,
nor does it exist in the specific
codefresh-croc-dev,
which means that we're ready to migrate
it. Now I can also run kget secrets to
see a list of any secrets. You can see
that I don't have any release history in
the codefresh-croc-dev.
And you'll see what that looks like in
just a moment. Now, if I do kget config
map in cube system and I search for
you can see all three releases. Now,
let's go ahead and use the 2 to3 plugin.
But before we actually convert it, let's
go ahead and use the dash- dry-run flag
to see which release is going to be
converted and which release versions
will be created. Now we can remove that
flag and actually let the conversion
happen.
There we go. Now when we run the same
command we ran previously for getting
secrets. Now you see the helm.sh.v1
secret for v1, v2 and v3.
Also, if I still run the config map, you
can see that the previous releases in
Helm 2 still exist and the actual
release itself still exists. So, just
because I use the Helm 2 to3 plugin
doesn't mean that it erases anything
from Helm 2. It just sets it up to where
we're ready for Helm 3.
Now, I can uninstall that and remove it
just as I would any other release. All
right. So the next thing I want to show
you is how you handle Helm 2 to 3 when
it comes to DevOps and CI/CD. To do
that, I'm going to use something called
Codefresh. Codefresh is a Kubernetes
native CI/CD or DevOps system. Now I
already have a pipeline that's set up
that actually deployed Crockhunter to my
Codefresh dev croc namespace. You can
see that I was using 2.16.1
in my CF helm. And actually every step
takes place within a container. So, we
know that that container is also running
2.16.1.
You can see everything that got deployed
previously and all of that looks
beautiful. So, now we're going to flip
over into our Visual Studio Code editor
and I'm going to show you how my YAML or
how my pipeline works. First, I have one
step for prod and I have another step
for actually dev, which was the
environment that we just upgraded. And
every step works in YAML. So we have
everything kind of indented very similar
to Helm and Kubernetes. So one of the
first things that we're going to do is
we're going to want to update the Helm
version. You can see that I'm currently
using 2.16.1,
but I have a line right underneath it
commented out for 3.1.1.
So we're simply going to comment out
2.16.1
and uncomment 3.1.1. And just to be
safe, I'm going to also do that on the
production level just so everything's in
line. But since we didn't do the
migration for 2 to three on production,
we're not even going to worry about that
or run that. I'm really concerned about
just updating Helm 2 to three for our
dev instance of Croc Hunter. So we'll go
ahead and check this in. We'll just say
update to V3 Helm and we'll commit.
Now we'll go back over to our browser
and we can click on builds. Now, I have
a previous build that I ran that
actually deployed out that 2.16.1.
You can see that I have an approval
needed before I hit prod. But most
importantly, when we scroll up to the
top, you can see that this was
previously using 216.1.
So, we'll go back into the release that
we just fired off. And this is a big
pipeline. This is something that was
already existing. So the main reason
come I wanted to show you how this works
is you can update very simply from 2 to
3 without changing anything that you
previously had in place. So in this
instance this was a pipeline that I've
used for just about a year now. It's one
that I rely on for every demo. It
actually uses several different popular
tools in the industry. Uses JROG
Artifactory, JROG X-ray. I even publish
messages over to uh to Slack and I also
run Selenium tests on here. So I didn't
want to have to rewrite this just for
Helm 3. As you can see, this pipeline
has already passed the deploy to dev
step and it did so with that change of
just uncommenting out that one line to
where now you're using Helm 3.1.1.
So it's very simple to plan for, very
simple to update. In fact, if we wanted
to be 100% certain, we can go back over
to Visual Studio Code and we can rerun
the commands that we've run previously.
First, we can do an H3 ls. Make sure
that we're running against the correct
namespace of -ashdev. And there's our
new revision at revision 4.
All right. So, now that we've kind of
walked through all of that, you're
probably wondering what's next. We've
been through quite a journey, right?
We've gotten to go hands-on with Helm 3.
We've learned how to install it, how to
run our normal commands, and how to
handle release migration from 2 to 3.
So, the next step is to upgrade to Helm
3. Go get involved with our community.
We would love to have you be a part of
it, and we would love to hear from you.
You can check out v3.helm.sh/doccks/faq.
You can also check out helm.sh
for community calls. We would love
feedback on new use cases and workflows
that we previously haven't considered.
We also need people to continue testing
for backwards compatibility with
existing charts. If something breaks,
let us know. Finally, thank you very
much for hanging out with me. Just one
more quick thing is you might be
wondering who I am. I know I introduced
myself, Jessica. I work for Azure, but
as you can tell throughout this demo,
I'm very passionate about containers,
open-source, DevOps, mentioning a few
things to be aware of in your CI/CD. I
am also a CNCF or cloudnative cloud
foundation ambassador with an emphasis
in Kubernetes and Helm. And it was my
absolute pleasure to hang out with you
today. Thank you so much. Have a great
day.