Kind: captions
Language: en
Unless you use Kubernetes for your personal
projects or some kind of POC, you need to
be able to customize Kubernetes configuration
files such deployments, services, ingresses,
etc., to a specific environment.
For example, if you expose an application
to the internet using ingress, you definitely
need to update DNS for different environments.
Due to the fact that there are so many projects
out there, and some of them are widely used,
such as Helm, the problem is still considered
to be not completely solved.
One approach to configuration reuse is simply
copy-paste.
However, as with code, it makes it harder
to benefit from ongoing improvements to the
source.
Another approach to reuse is to express the
source material as a parameterized template.
Then a tool is processing the template executing
any embedded scripting, and replacing parameters
with desired values to generate the configuration.
The challenge here is that the templates and
value files are not specification of Kubernetes
API resources.
They are a necessary new thing, a new language
that wraps the Kubernetes API.
The problem here with Helm is that different
teams want different changes.
So almost every specification that you include
in the YAML file becomes a parameter that
needs a value.
And finally, a template-free approach.
Since the Kubernetes configuration is expressed
as JSON or YAML, it's relatively easy to target
individual keys and merge them with environment-specific
values.
That's where kustomize comes into play.
It's native to Kubernetes, a template-free
way to customize Kubernetes objects.
Kustomize has the concept of bases and overlays.
A base is a directory with a kustomization.yaml
file, which contains a set of Kubernetes resources
such as deployments, configMaps, services,
etc., and associated customization.
Overlays directories contain environment-specific
changes.
It may be a name prefix, replica count, a
new image tag, or other changes.
Kustomize uses an industry-standard declarative
approach that can be described in YAML and
stored in git.
Since it's template free, it expresses the
full power of Kubernetes API, with no need
to parameterize every single line compared
to Helm.
It can be used for both bespoke (build in-house
apps) and off-the-shelf applications such
as Redis, Kafka, Postgres, and other open-source
projects.
Kustomize supports bulk management operations:
creation, deletion, and updates.
It is built into kubectl, so you can create
and update resources using kubectl apply -k
command and similar command to delete.
Since Kustomize is provided as a standalone
golang package and cli tool as well as it
is built into kubectl, it's easy to integrate
with user's tools and workflows.
In this video, we will go over 4 examples.
In this first one, I'll show you how to convert
a typical Kubernetes deployment object to
a customizable base and overlay.
In the second example, we will use configMapGenerator
to create config maps specific to particular
environments.
You are probably aware if you simply update
configmap with new data, it will not trigger
a rolling deployment update.
The recommended approach without kustomize
is to create a new config map with a new name
and replace it in deployment.
Kustomize automates this process.
Every time you modify the data, kustomize
generates a new configmap object and appends
a hash, which triggers a rolling update.
The third example will focus on secrets and
how to generate them from multiple sources,
such as environment variables.
And the final example demonstrates how to
update an image name or a tag based on the
specific environment.
The common workflow is to set up continuous
deployment to the development or staging environment
and when it's properly tested, upgrade the
production.
You can find the code and commands that I
run in the video in a blog post.
The link will be in the description.
Alright, let's start.
I'm going to follow the same naming convention.
Create a base directory.
This folder will be used in other environments
to customize our deployment.
As I mentioned before, the goal of the first
example is to show you how to convert a simple
deployment to a kustomize base and overlays.
It will be a Kubernetes deployment based on
an open-source nginx image.
I specified a namespace as a default, but
you can easily override it in each environment.
The important part is that it's a native Kubernetes
specification.
It's not a template that needs to be customized.
We will share this deployment and make some
environment-specific changes by either merging
with the original or completely replacing
it.
Next, you need to create a kustomization.yaml
file in the same base directory.
Optionally you can specify the kind to be
Kustomization, but it's not necessary if you
use kustomization.yaml file name.
In the following examples, we will omit this
part.
Then you need to specify what files will be
used as a base (in other words, shared between
environments) in this kustomization directory.
Since we have a single deployment file, let's
put it there.
I would say that's the bare minimum that you
need to get started.
Now let's create the environments folder.
The first environment will be staging.
To modify our nginx deployment to be specific
to this environment, we need kustomization.yaml
file again.
Here, for example, I want to replace the default
namespace on the original deployment with
a staging namespace.
Then same, here, we need to point this kustomization
to the base directory.
The base name is an arbitrary name, and you
can use anything you want; just update the
path.
For this example, let's create staging namespace
manually using the kubectl client.
Kustomize is built into kubectl, and you can
apply it by providing the -k flag.
You can also use a standalone binary if you
want to build and preview the changes.
As you can see, we have a single pod running
in the staging namespace.
We modified a single deployment attribute,
namespace.
Now let's create another production environment.
In this folder, we can create another deployment
object; the key is to have the same deployment
name as the original.
And we can choose to override any part of
the deployment; for example, for production,
we need 20 replicas.
As you can imagine, with Helm, you need to
go over the whole Deployment specification
and parameterize every single attribute if
you want to be as flexible as kustomize.
This deployment doesn't have to be a complete
object if we're going to merge it together
with the original.
Also, we need kustomization.yaml file.
Update the namespace to be production.
You can open this link to find all possible
parameters that you can override in the kustomization
file.
This list is additional customization that
you can add to simply modifying the source
object.
If you use the same namespace to deploy services,
you may choose to prepend a prefix to the
name.
Then the same path to the base directory.
In this example, I want kustomize to create
a production namespace instead so that I will
specify additional namespace resource here.
Then we have two options either merge two
deployments together or choose to replace
You can do it not only with deployments but
with all other Kubernetes objects, such as
roles, stateful sets, configmaps, etc.
The last item here is a production namespace.
That will be applied along with deployment.
To apply, use the same command; just specify
the path to the production environment.
Now we have 20 nginx pods in the production
Also, we have a production prefix at the front
of the pod and deployment.
To delete, you can use a similar command;
just don't forget to use the -k flag.
In the second example, I'll show you how to
use config map generators.
When you change any data, it will trigger
a rolling update.
We're going to use the same folder structure.
Example 2 and a base directory.
This deployment will use an environment variable
that we will retrieve from configmap.
The same very simple kustomization file with
a single resource.
We don't need to define configmap in the base
directory.
Now under the staging folder, we will create
kustomization and generate configmap.
Point to the base directory.
Then the configMapGenerator.
There are multiple ways to generate it.
In this example, we use literals, env equal
to staging.
That's it; let's go ahead and apply the folder.
The pod is already running.
If you take a look at the configmap, you can
notice the hash appended to the name.
Let's print it out.
Under the data section, you have env equal
Now there is another way to generate a configmap
from the file.
Instead of environment variables, we will
get the data from configmap and mount it to
the file.
Another change we need to make is to add a
second generator.
In this case, we will use a file.
We also need to create a creds.txt file in
the same directory.
We have a username and a password here.
Let's reapply it.
We have generated two configmaps.
Let's verify if we can access the credentials
from the pod.
We can cat the file from the pod.
Alright, it's the same username and password.
The third example will be similar, but instead
of configmaps, we will generate secrets.
Under the environments section, we use secret
instead of configmap.
The same concept, when the content of the
secret changes, it generates a new secret
with a hash which triggers a rolling update.
To check environment variables in the pod,
you can run the env command.
And we have our username admin environment
variable.
The second environment variable region will
be generated from the file.
Add another generator to kustomize.
Be careful when generating anything from the
file, especially environment variables.
If you add a new line to the file, it will
be appended to the environment variable as
well.
That's the region, us-west-2.
Finally, let's use the environment variable
to populate environment variable in the pod.
Create a .env file and define variables, for
example, password 123.
When you apply the configuration, kustomize
will source it and parse environment variables
We have all three environment variables here.
The final example demonstrates how to update
the image tag or name based on the environment.
This deployment is without any changes.
You can include the images section and rewrite
the name and a tag.
Kustomize will search for any image in the
base directory with the name nginx.
I don't want to update the image name; just
upgrade the version.
You can see that we have a new image, version
1.21.6.
In my opinion, this is the best tool right
now to customize configuration files based
on the environment.
I want to remind you if you use Helm, to achieve
the same flexibility, you need to parameterize
every single attribute.
Also, it's easier to integrate kustomize to
existing tools and workflows, such as continuous
deployment.
Let me know in the comments if I was able
to convince you to try kustomize.