Kind: captions
Language: en
Hello and welcome back to the channel.
In this short video, we will discuss
what are item important producers in
Apache CFKA and how can we make our
producers become item important. So if
you have not subscribed to this channel
already, please click subscribe, hit the
bell icon and let's quickly get started.
Now just consider a normal scenario of
producing messages into Apache CFKA. The
producer will send the right request. In
this case, it wants to write X into a
CFKA topic. The broker will append X
into that CFKA topic and then it will
acknowledge the producer.
Now consider a scenario in which things
don't quite go as expected and duplicate
rights happen because of that. In this
case, after the broker has written the
message Y into the CFKA topic, it
acknowledges the producer. But due to
some reason, as you can see in step
number three in the diagram below, the
acknowledgement of Y does not reach the
producer. After the producer times out,
it will again try to write Y into the
CFKA topic because as far as the
producer is concerned, the message Y has
still not been written into the CFKA
topic. Now the broker thinks that this
is a new message and again writes the
message Y into the CFKA topic and
acknowledges the producer that the right
was successful.
And as you can see now we have to deal
with the problem of duplicate rights.
Now an item important producer is what
exactly solves this problem. An item
important producer is a CFKA producer
which writes a message into a CFKA topic
exactly once.
Let us see how it works.
So what have we done here? Well, while
sending any write request to the broker,
the producer introduces a producer ID as
well as a sequence number for that
request. Now when this message is
written by the broker into the CFKA
topic, it also includes the producer ID
as well as the message sequence number.
After a successful write, the broker
acknowledges the producer.
Let us now come back to the failed
acknowledgement case. Now in this case
when the producer retries to write to
the CFKA topic the broker can figure it
out very easily that this producer ID
has already sent a message with a given
sequence ID and this message has already
been successfully written into the CFKA
topic. Therefore the producer sends back
a duplicate acknowledgement without
writing any more messages into the CFKA
topic. And in this way our problem of
duplicate rights into CFKA is solved.
Now how do we actually make our
producers work in an item important
fashion? Well, the only thing that we
have to do is set one of the producer
properties which is enable do it
importance to be equal to true. As you
can read from the official CFKA
documentation, when the enable item
portance property is set equal to true,
the producer will ensure that exactly
one copy of each message is written in
the stream.
If set to false, producer retries may
write duplicates of the retried message
in the stream.
Please also make note of the fact that
there are restrictions on other
properties as well. If you want to
enable item importance to name a few,
max inflight request per connection
should be less than or equal to five,
retries should be greater than zero and
acknowledgements must be set to all. If
we don't set these properties
explicitly, the suitable properties will
be set for us and in case of any
incompatibility config exception will be
thrown.
All right, that's all we had for this
short video, guys. And I really hope
that you have learned something new
today. If you like the content of the
video, please do hit the like button. If
you like the content of my channel,
please click subscribe. You can hit the
bell icon to never miss any new updates.
Like always, thanks a lot for watching
and let's see you very soon with a brand
new tutorial.