Kind: captions
Language: en
In today's video, we will provision an EKS cluster and Fargate,
and then deploy an NGX Docker image on the cluster.
Also, I'll show how to fix Core DS add-on deployment issue.
All steps are using the AWS Management Console,
without installing AWS and Kubernetes control commands on your local box.
Hello everyone, welcome back to my channel.
My name is Lian Duan, and I have been a developer for over 20 years,
specializing in DevOps and cloud security.
All video-related content and code are in my GitHub repo, the links are below.
Today's topics are, what is Fargate in EKS?
What are the benefits of using Fargate with EKS?
And hands-on demos, create an EKS cluster and Fargate profile via AWS Console.
Let's start Fargate on EKS concept.
Amazon EKS, or Electrical Kubernetes Service,
provides a managed Kubernetes service that simplifies tool deployment,
management, and scaling of containerized applications using Kubernetes.
It's called a control plan in AWS EKS architecture.
EKS has two data plans, an EC2-based data plan and Fargate data plan.
EKS can use one of them, or use two types of data plan together.
Check out my video, Create EKS and EC2 with AWS Console.
It has step-by-step guidelines for building an EC2 data plan.
Today, we'll focus on the Fargate data plan.
What is Fargate?
Fargate is a serverless computing engine for containers.
If you're interested in Fargate, check out my Fargate video playlist.
Fargate profile lines bridge for EKS and Fargate.
The Fargate profile tells EKS which containers should run on Fargate.
EKS manages Fargate by itself.
We only have read-only permission for the EKS-managed Fargate on the Fargate console.
Are there benefits of using Fargate with EKS?
Easy management.
Fargate eliminates the need of pervasion and managed service for Kubernetes clusters,
allowing developers to focus on application development rather than in-structure management.
No need for servers.
Fargate provides a serverless experience for running containers
and enabling great agility in deploying and scaling applications.
Handle traffic automatically.
Fargate offers automatic scaling and high availability,
ensuring that applications can handle varying levels of traffic without manual action,
so it improves reliability and efficiency.
After we know the Fargate concept and benefits, move to hands-on demos.
We will create an EKS cluster and then attach a Fargate profile to the cluster.
After they're running, a engine is well deployed.
Before diving into the hands-on demos, ensure you have two IAM roles,
EKS admin and EKS Fargate.
EKS admin has Amazon EKS cluster policy and is used by EKS.
Fargate has Amazon EKS Fargate pod execution role policy.
The role is by Fargate profile.
Also, you need a VPC for EKS and Fargate profile.
This is my demo virtual private cloud on AWS with multiple subnets in different availability zones.
The demo VPC with specific IP addresses range is 10.0.0.0.16.
The VPC has two public subnets, public 01 and public 02.
The EKS uses public subnets and Fargate deploys to the private subnets.
Based on the AWS document, Fargate cannot be on public subnets with EKS.
The public subnets use an internet gateway to go to the internet
and the private subnets NAT gateway for outbound internet traffic.
If you do not have it yet, you can create the VPC from the console
or clone my GitLab repository and then go to the code folder,
run two commands, tireform init and tireform apply to create the VPC.
To create in progress, we move to hands-on demo detail.
We'll do below hands-on demos together.
Create an EKS cluster.
Create a Fargate profile with two namespaces.
Deploys NGX pod and fix EKS core DNS pod deployment issue.
Open the AWS console.
Log in to the AWS with my root user.
If you use another AWS account, make sure your account has all the needed permissions.
Sign in as root user.
Sign in.
In the services area, search EKS.
Select electrical Kubernetes service.
Select create cluster.
The cluster name is EKS demo.
Select previous version 1.28 because in the future video,
I'll demo how to upgrade Kubernetes version.
Use EKS admin role.
The role only has one policy, Amazon EKS cluster policy.
Cluster access uses default selections.
Add one tag, demo EKS.
Go to next page.
VPC select EKS demo VPC01.
Subnets selection only keep the public subnets in there.
Remove private subnets.
Ignore security groups as now.
Cluster endpoint access uses public and private.
Go next.
Ignore login configure as now.
Click next.
Only select three default add-ons.
The add-on version uses default value.
Click create button.
By the clusters list UI.
Refresh.
You see the EKS demo cluster is creating now.
It will take from 10 minutes to 20 minutes.
You see the support notification.
Do not worry about it right now.
I'll show you how to upgrade to the latest version.
After the cluster is active,
the next part is create a Fargate profile.
Click cluster name.
Go to the computer tab.
Move a little bit down.
Add a Fargate profile.
Name is EKS Fargate demo.
Execution role select EKS Fargate.
Subnets use two private subnets.
Add one tag.
Demo.
Value is EKS.
We'll create two namespaces.
First namespace is demo namespace.
Value to deploy our NGX pod.
Second namespace name is kube-system.
The namespace values to deploy the core DNS add-on.
Add a match label for core DNS selection.
The key is k8s-i.
Value is kube-dns.
Reveal all the information.
Create.
The profile creating take around 10 minutes.
Fargate is active right now.
Let me clear verification.
EKS use Fargate profile to create a Fargate cluster and manage the Fargate cluster itself.
We are able to see the Fargate in the Fargate console.
Let me switch the tab.
But you cannot do any management on the cluster.
For example, deploy the new pod from here.
It's just like view permission for us.
Back to the EKS console.
The Fargate is available now.
While using the AWS Cloud Shell to deploy a NGX Docker image on the cluster.
Click Cloud Shell.
Make the shell screen bigger.
First command.
Run AWS STS get a seller identity command to check AWS identity.
We are in the root user right now.
STS means security token service.
This command provides information about AWS identity to ensure your current account has the right permissions.
Next, check the kubectl version.
Command is kubectl space version space hyphen client.
If you do not install the kubectl yet.
Follow the document to install in your Cloud Shell.
Back to the console.
Next step.
Use AWS EKS update kubectl command to update the kubectl file for our demo EKS cluster.
Clean up the screen.
The following step.
Create a namespace and deploy NGX Docker image.
The command is kubectl apply space hyphen i plus the deploying yaml file location.
Let me copy the file.
Open the new tab to quickly go through the deployment file together.
There are two parts on the file.
First part.
Create a demo namespace on the EKS and then deploy NGX Docker image on the namespace.
Graphic size is three.
We should see the three paths running for the NGX.
Back to the Cloud Shell.
Enter.
Namespace created successfully.
Deploy NGX Docker image in progress.
Deploy completed.
Back to the UI.
Go to EKS demo and then go to computer tab.
Under the resources, we should see the three NGX deployments.
Check the status.
It's running.
Back to the list page.
How about the core DNS?
The core DNS is running the scheduling issue.
The message is no nodes available to the scheduled path.
We already created the kubectl namespace.
Why we still face the issue?
When you go to the internet, search the message.
You will see we have to run some core DNS patch or remove the annotation on the deployment file.
Actually, this is not true for the current 1.28 version.
To fix it, very simple.
Open the Cloud Shell again.
Do the cleanup.
Use the kubectl rollout restart command to redeploy the core DNS.
Use the kubectl get-out command to check the status.
No resource found in the default namespace.
Let me add the namespace parameter.
Move the space.
Move the space and run again.
You see the core DNS pods are running.
Close the Cloud Shell.
Go to resources.
You will see all the file pods are running.
Go to the computer type.
You will see five nodes are running.
Two for core DNS.
Three for the NGX deployment.
Based on the NGX deployment,
You may have a question.
How to access my NGX pod?
There is only one way we can do it.
Use Ingress.
Please subscribe to my channel.
I'll show you how to do it in the future.
That's all for today's video.
We used AWS EKS console, created EKS cluster, and run the NGX deployment.
Let's run the NGX deployment.
We used AWS EKS console, created EKS cluster, and attached Fargate profile on the cluster.
And then create two namespaces.
Use the demo namespace.
Deploy the NGX pod.
Use the kubectl namespace.
Deploy the core DNS add-ons.
And fix the core DNS deployment issue.
By the way, do not forget to delete all the resources.
After your exercise is completed.
To save your money.
Delete the Fargate profile first.
When you delete it, delete the EKS cluster.
Finally, delete the demo VPC.
Thank you and see you next time.