===== [출처 강의: 03_버전관리와_협업] =====
## 영상 1: Git과 GitHub을 활용한 협업 | 브랜치, 풀 리퀘스트, 병합 대 리베이스
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_wQdY_5Tb5Q

Hi, I'm Luna. Hi, I'm Jen. In this video, we're going to help you understand how to collaborate using Git and GitHub. This is going to be a very practical workflow where we show you how to create new branches, switch between branches, merge your branch using pull requests, get merge, and get rebase, as well as how to deal with nasty merge conflicts. If you haven't already, make sure to watch this video on the basics of Git and GitHub. This covers the basic Git workflow which we're going to be building on in this video.

First, let's talk about branching in Git. Branching is a way to create a unique set of code changes in a separate workspace in your repository. Generally, when you are working on a project with many features, you should create a branch for each contained feature. These feature branches are usually merged into the main branch once your changes are finalized. This makes collaboration much easier because everyone's working on their own edits in their own feature branch and only pushes changes to the main branch when they're finished.

I'll show you what this looks like on GitHub. This is what you'll see when you pull up the repository on the GitHub website. On the top left corner, you'll see a dropdown menu showing the current branch that you're currently working on. Once you have other branches that are active, you'll also be able to switch between branches using this dropdown menu. Right next to it, you'll see the number of branches that are active in your repo. Right now there's only one active branch, which is the main branch. This is also sometimes referred to as the master branch. Those two terms are used interchangeably, but this is going to be your default branch for this repository. Basically, anytime you have another branch, you'll be merging into the main branch.

Now that we've seen what branches look like on GitHub, let's switch to looking at it in the terminal. First, we want to use the command "git branch" to see what branch we're currently on. You can see we only have main, which is highlighted in green since that's the branch we're on. If we want to create a new branch in this same repository, we can use the command "git checkout -b" and then whatever your branch name is going to be. I can just name my branch luna, for example. Now we've created that new branch and switched to it. If we use the command "git branch" again, you'll see we have two branches this time. Our current one is called luna, which is highlighted, and the other one is main.

Now let's make a file in our branch. If we do "touch luna.txt" and then add something to it, say "hi", and now we can add and commit it. So now that we've added and committed, we want to push, but if we do "git push", you'll see we get an error that says our current branch has no upstream. This means Git doesn't know yet where to push our changes from this local branch and what remote branch it's pushing to. All we need to do is use that command it gives us. It's "git push" and then set the upstream. Origin basically means it's referring to the remote branch. We say the remote of luna, and you basically only have to do this once. Any time you create a new branch, once you do that and you do "git push" after that, it won't ask you for it anymore. It's already set that upstream.

Now that you've done that, we can see that if we do "ls", we'll see the new files. If we were to switch back to main and look at the files there, you'll see that that file is not there. The branches and the changes on the two branches are completely separate. Now we'll look back at how that looks on GitHub. On the main branch, you'll see that it still only has what we originally had, which is just the hello.txt file. But now when you click on the dropdown button, you'll see that the gen branch also exists and also the luna branch. Here you can switch into the gen branch and see the specific gen.txt file that I created, as well as the luna branch which shows you the file that luna created.

Now we're going to talk about what a pull request is and how you can make pull requests. You can see there's a new button that pops up that says "Compare and pull request". If we click that, you can start making a pull request. A pull request is a way of letting other people know what changes you're gonna be pushing to the main branch. It's really good for allowing more discussion about these changes and just keeping a log of all the features you're pushing and changes you're making. You don't push them directly to main, but you go through more of a review process through making pull requests.

This is what making a general pull request looks like. It's best practice to write a really detailed title and description for the pull request to make sure to explain what changes you've made and what you're merging into main so that other people know exactly what you're doing. You can add specific reviewers, for example I can add jen here and ask her to review my pull request. This will actually tell her that she's requested as a code reviewer. Now I can create that pull request. Once the pull request is created, you'll see that if you keep adding any commits to your branch, those will show up here. It's not necessarily fixed. You can keep adding to a pull request even once you make it, and you can see a log of your commits. An important part of this is also looking at the files changed. This is basically going to show you what the difference is between what's on main now and what changes you're pushing.

Once that pull request has been created, you'll see a notification in the pull requests tab. If you click onto that, you'll see the pull request that was just created with the title that was written. If you click into it, you'll be able to add a review. If you click on the add review button, it'll show you the files that are different and also the different commits, and you can click review changes to add a comment, approve the changes, or request that changes are made onto the branch.

Since this branch has no conflicts with the base branch, we can complete the pull request by doing a merge pull request. You can also add a more descriptive title if you want to. You can confirm that merge to finish off that pull request. Pull requests are pretty straightforward. Another great thing about them is that you can actually customize what your repo looks like for doing pull requests. You can add things like branch protections so that would mean not allowing people to push domain unless they're making a pull request or requiring a certain number of code reviewers or even requiring automated tests to run before that pull request is allowed to merge. There are a lot of powerful tools here, and most large teams that use GitHub will use all these features because it helps keep your repo clean and keeps a good log of all the changes you're making.

Now, pull requests are integrating your branch's changes into the main branch. But let's say that the commits in main are relevant to the feature that you're working on. To incorporate new changes in the main branch into your branch, you can use git merge or git rebase.

Right now I am in my personal gen branch. We had just completed that pull request in main, so I know that main has a bit more commits than my local main has. Let's go to main branch and pull those new commits. It's always good practice to pull from the remote branch as often as you can to make sure everything is up to date.

The first option we'll be talking about is going to be rebasing. Rebasing essentially moves your entire branch to begin at the most recent version of main. This means that instead of using a merge commit, rebasing actually rewrites the project history by creating new commits for each commit in your personal branch. The benefits of rebasing is that you have a clean linear project history. This means you're not going to see extra commits in your commit history when you rebase. But the tradeoff is that it loses kind of traceability. You won't be able to see exactly when you rebase. Another thing with rebasing is it can be confusing or tricky to get right.

To do the rebasing command, it's going to be "git rebase". Once we do that, it says we are rewinding head to replay your work on top of it. This means we are going back so that the start of the gen branch is starting at the last commit of the main branch. After that, it applies the one commit that you have, which is adding the gen file. If we do "ls", you'll see that the luna.txt file now also exists in your local branch. This means the rebase went through correctly and everything is up to date.

The next thing we'll be looking at is merging. With this, we will also try to show you how to resolve a merge conflict. Luna is going to add a line to the hello.txt file, and I am also going to add a line to the hello.txt file. I've updated that and I will add that and commit. Now we have a change in hello.txt, and we're going to go back to main to pull the change that luna created.

Luna also updated hello.txt. First we need to switch back into our gen branch. Once you do that, you'll see that an error pops up saying that our remote branch and the local branch have diverged. This is because when we were editing our hello.txt file before, we did not push our changes. The remote gen branch and the local gen branch have different commits. This is going to be a version of merging where you use "git pull" to merge the remote branch into yours. When we use "git pull", a merge commit will pop up saying that's merging the remote branch into our local branch. You can add a commit message in here or you can just leave it as is. Once you exit that, it will say the merge was made using a recursive strategy. This means that the remote branch and the local branch are now merged together. Let's do "git push" to make sure our edits of the hello.txt file are pushed onto the remote branch.

Merging creates a new merge commit that ties together the histories of the two using the most recent versions of each branch. The benefit of merging over rebasing is that the branches aren't individually changed at all. But the tradeoff is that your branch's history can get really clogged. Merging adds these commit messages that are like "merge this branch into this branch".

Let's try the merge command. "git merge main". Here you'll see that there is a merge conflict in the hello.txt file. There are a couple of ways to resolve merge conflicts. The way we'll be showing you is using a text editor. When you click into the hello.txt file, what you see highlighted in one color is your changes which is on our branch, and then what's highlighted in another color is the changes in main. Here you get to choose basically what version you want to use. You want to use the version for main which says hello. We're going to save and then go back to the terminal and add that file and then commit "resolving merge conflict". This commit essentially merges the two branches together. If we do "git merge main" again, you'll see that everything is up to date now. You can use "git push" to make sure that your local branch is synced up with your remote branch.

When you look at the hello.txt file, the version that you selected will be the version that exists now in your branch. Most code editors will have a way to resolve merge conflicts that's pretty similar to this. Many people use VS Code. There are also lots of tools that will let you do this in the command line if you prefer.

Thank you so much for watching this video on Git branching. We really hope it helped you. Give us a big thumbs up if you enjoyed this video and don't forget to subscribe if you enjoy our content. We post videos every week. Make sure to comment if you have any questions for us or if you have a topic you want us to cover in the future. See you guys soon. Bye!


## 영상 2: Git Merge vs Rebase 시각적 설명 | 어떤 것을 사용해야 할까?
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cjSjlHUmaBU

You have probably been there working on a feature then trying to merge it back into main and suddenly conflicts everywhere. The big question pops up: Should I merge or rebase?

Let's break it down in simple terms. Git merge versus git rebase. What they are, how they work, and when to use which.

Let's say you're working with two branches. The main branch has commits A, B, and then C. Your feature branch branched off from A with commits D and E. At this point, your team might have already pushed B and C to main while you were working on D and E. Now you want to bring your feature back into the main line. So do we merge or rebase?

With git merge, you simply combine the two branches. Think of it like joining two rivers. They converge at a new point. So you run "git checkout main" followed by "git merge feature". Git creates a new commit, let's call it "merge", which ties together both histories. No changes to existing commits, just a new merge commit that says "hey I join feature and main here". The commits D and E stay exactly as they were. Their commit IDs remain unchanged. This means the original branching structure and all commit metadata, timestamps, authorship, etc. is fully preserved. That's why they say merge preserves history.

The downside is it can get messy. Let's say you're working on a team of five developers. Everyone creates a feature branch from main and merges back in after their work is done. Your history might look like this after a few merges. Feature commits from different branches are mixed with merge commits. When you run "git log --oneline --graph", you'll see a tangle tree of branches and merge points. Yes, everything is there, but it's hard to follow who did what, when, and why. You might see duplicate commits, merge noise, or commits out of order. That's what we mean by messy history.

With rebase, you replay everyone's work one after another in a straight line. Easy to read, easy to bisect, and easy to debug. But again, it comes with the tradeoff of rewriting history, which isn't safe in shared branches.

Instead of joining two branches like merge, rebase moves your commits and places them on top of the current main. You run "git checkout feature" followed by "git rebase main". Git reapplies those commits D and E as new commits on top of C. So now your history looks like A B C D prime followed by E prime, a straight line like it was always written that way.

The good part is it's cleaner history and easier to follow. However, we are rewriting history. When you run "git rebase main" from your feature branch, Git replays your commit D and E on top of C. But in doing so, Git creates new commits, not reuses the old one. So even though the code may be the same, the rebased commits are A, B, C, D prime, and E prime. D prime and E prime are new versions of D and E. They have new commit IDs, and technically D and E, the originals, are no longer part of the main history.

Your feature is still there, but the original timeline is rewritten. That's why we say rebase rewrites history. Git is smart. It keeps them around for a while in case you want to undo or recover. They are stored in what's called reflog or reference log, which tracks all recent changes. But after a certain time, usually 30 days, if they are unreachable, Git's garbage collector will eventually remove them to free up space. The original D and E still exist temporarily in your repo until Git cleans them up with garbage collection. They are not immediately deleted, but they are not referenced anymore.

If you have already pushed your branch and others are using it, rebasing can cause major issues. So never rebase shared branches unless you are confident everyone is aligned.

Both merge and rebase can trigger conflicts, especially when two branches touch the same line. With merge, you resolve conflicts once in the merge commit. With rebase, you might resolve conflicts in each commit as git reapplies them one by one. That's why many teams prefer merge for safety and rebase for local cleanup.

Let's say you are working on a checkout flow. You branched off main last week, and since then your teammate added a coupon and pushed it to main. Before you open your PR, you run "git fetch origin" and then "git rebase origin main". So now your work sits on top of their changes. Clean and conflict free. Your PR shows only your commits, which is super neat. But if you're collaborating with others on the same feature branch, stick with merge.

Here are a few tips: Use merge when collaborating on shared branches. Use rebase before opening a PR to tidy up your local commits and avoid rebasing public branches unless you coordinate with your team. Use "git pull --rebase" to reduce merge commits when pulling from remote.

Bonus tip: use "git log --oneline --graph" to visualize the difference between the two styles.

So merge or rebase? It depends on your team's workflow and what you care about: clarity or safety. Merge keeps history intact but can get messy. Rebase rewrites history for a cleaner log, but you have got to use it with care.

If you want to master more Git magic, check out the earlier video on Git workflows, feature branching, trunk-based development, and all that good stuff. If this video made Git a little less scary, give it a thumbs up, subscribe, and let me know in the comments for more developer-friendly breakdowns like this. See you in the next one.


## 영상 3: 오픈소스 소통을 위한 Git 공부하기 | ep8-1. 비주얼 스튜디오 코드로 쉽게 Git 사용하기
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wMvfmGY0r90

안녕하세요. 오픈소스 세계에서 의사소통을 위한 Git, 여덟 번째 에피소드가 왔습니다.

이번 에피소드에서는 이제까지 Git와 GitHub를 보여드렸을 때 명령 프롬프트, CLI 명령을 중심으로 봤었는데, GUI, 비주얼 스튜디오 코드에서 어떻게 쉽게 쓸 수 있는지를 설명하고자 합니다.

비주얼 스튜디오 코드는 리눅스, 맥 OS, 윈도우 어떤 환경이 되었든지 여러분들이 오픈소스 방식으로 개발, 관리되는 이 소프트웨어를 모두 무료로 사용하실 수 있고, 여러분이 원하면 비주얼 스튜디오 코드 자체의 GitHub 저장소에 풀 리퀘스트를 통해서 기여하실 수도 있습니다. 가장 중요한 특징은 비주얼 스튜디오 코드에 익스텐션이라는 확장 기능이 있어서 정말 다양한 확장팩들이 컨트리뷰션을 통해, 커뮤니티를 통해 개발이 이루어지고 있고, 심지어 GitHub에서도 GitHub를 비주얼 스튜디오 코드에서 더 잘 쓸 수 있는 확장팩을 준비해서 제공하고 있습니다.

비주얼 스튜디오 코드에서 확장팩을 하나둘 추가하면서 점점 추가되는 기능들을 여러분들이 직접 살펴보실 수 있고, 이제 로컬 원격에서뿐만 아니라 웹 브라우저에서도 코드 스페이스를 통해서 개발 가능하다는 공문이 있습니다. GitHub 쪽에서 코드 스페이스라는 게 점점 추가되면서 곧 베타가 아닌 정식 릴리즈가 된다고 합니다. 어쨌든 이 코드 스페이스를 통하면 GitHub에서 딱 클릭만 하면 바로 비주얼 스튜디오 코드를 로컬 환경에 설치하지 않고도 웹 브라우저에서 볼 수 있는 아주 유용한 기능이 되겠습니다.

이번 에피소드에서는 데모를 제 컴퓨터에 설치된 비주얼 스튜디오 코드 환경을 통해서 어떤 식으로 비주얼 스튜디오 코드에서 Git 또는 GitHub에 있는 내용을 가져와서 작업할 수 있는지를 직접 만나보도록 하겠습니다.

데모를 시작하도록 하겠습니다. 시작 버튼에서 code라고 치면 두 개가 있습니다. 저 같은 경우는 비주얼 스튜디오 코드의 최신 기능을 쓰고 싶어서 Insiders라는 걸 설치했는데, 일반 사용자분들은 code.visualstudio.com에서 바로 다운로드를 하시면 여기 있는 비주얼 스튜디오 코드 안정 버전이 일반적으로 설치됩니다. 오늘 데모는 안정 버전을 기준으로 하겠습니다.

비주얼 스튜디오 코드를 쓰시기 전에 한 가지 필수적인 부분이 있습니다. 지난 에피소드에서 Git를 윈도우에서 어떻게 설치하는지 보여드렸습니다. Git-scm.com에서 Git 명령어를 윈도우 형으로 설치해서 사용했습니다. 요즘 리눅스 환경은 Git 커맨드가 기본으로 설치되어 있고, 맥 OS 환경 같은 경우는 개발 환경에 따라서 Git를 직접 설치하실 수도 있고, 아니면 엑스코드라는 맥에서 iOS 애플리케이션 개발할 때 쓰는 IDE인 엑스코드 환경을 설치하시면 Git 명령어를 쓸 수 있습니다. 어쨌든 여러 환경에서 Git 명령어를 다 쓸 수 있다는 가정하에, 비주얼 스튜디오 코드는 기본적으로 소스 제어, 버전 관리할 수 있는 Git가 내장되어 있습니다. 그러나 Git 커맨드를 같이 갖고 있지는 않습니다.

비주얼 스튜디오 코드가 Git 커맨드를 인식할 수 있는 환경이 필요합니다. 그 환경은 여러분이 수동으로 구성해주는 것이 필요하고, 구성되어 있지 않다면 윈도우에서는 쉽게 git-scm.com에서 설치한 다음에 비주얼 스튜디오 코드를 사용하면 됩니다.

비주얼 스튜디오 코드의 가장 큰 장점은 확장팩입니다. 지금 제 비주얼 스튜디오 코드를 보면 한글로 나와 있습니다. 초기에 설치하면 영어로 보실 수도 있는데, Ctrl+Shift+P를 누르면 비주얼 스튜디오 코드의 장점인 명령 팔레트가 나타납니다. 여기서 languages라고 하면 언어 모드 변경하면 표시 언어 구성을 선택할 수 있습니다. 원래 영어만 있었는데 한글 언어 팩을 추가 언어 설치라는 걸 통해서 언어 설치 팩을 쭉 검색했습니다.

예를 들면 일본어 팩을 설치할 수 있습니다. 그러면 일본어 확장 언어 팩이 설치되고, 변경 후 다시 시작을 하게 되면 비주얼 스튜디오 코드가 재실행되고 일본어로 명령어가 나옵니다. 다시 언어 구성으로 해서 한국어로 바꾸게 되면 다시 재시작하게 되고, 재시작하면 한글로 잘 나올 것입니다.

비주얼 스튜디오 코드 자체에 처음에는 없지만 확장팩을 통해서 기능을 추가하기만 하면 원하는 기능이 차례차례 설치됩니다.

확장팩에서 예를 들어 파이썬을 검색하게 되면 파이썬 확장팩이 없을 수도 있습니다. 그 말은 뭐냐면 지금 설치된 비주얼 스튜디오 코드라는 개발 환경은 파이썬 언어를 이해할 수 있는 능력이 현재는 없습니다. 파이썬 확장팩을 설치하게 되면 비주얼 스튜디오 코드에서 파이썬 파일을 열었을 때 문법 하이라이팅, 강조 등을 쉽게 확인할 수 있고, 디버깅도 효율적으로 되면서 주피터 노트북 파일도 열 수 있게 됩니다. 이 파이썬 확장팩은 마이크로소프트에서 직접 기여하고 있습니다.

GitHub로 검색하시면 여러 확장팩이 있습니다. 여기서 주의하실 점은 이 확장팩은 누구나 다 만들 수 있고 기여할 수 있습니다. Git로 검색해서 살펴볼 것은 권장하는 첫 번째 확장팩인 "GitHub Pull Requests and Issues"입니다. 이 확장팩은 GitHub에서 만든 것입니다. GitHub를 보면 이름도 GitHub이고 GitHub 로고도 나와 있습니다. 그런데 작성자를 확인하면 KnisterPeter라고 하는, GitHub가 아닙니다. 확장팩에서 유의할 점은 누구나 다 기여할 수 있기 때문에 이 이름을 정확하게 보지 않으시면 자칫 검증되지 않은 확장팩을 설치할 수도 있습니다.

GitHub Pull Requests and Issues 확장팩을 설치해보겠습니다. 설치하면 이 확장팩이 이제 사용 가능한 것으로 나옵니다.

Ctrl+Shift+P를 누르게 되면 명령 팔레트가 나오고, clone이라고 하면 Git 복제할 수 있는 부분이 있습니다. 복제, 클론을 해보겠습니다. 클론할 때 GitHub에서 복제가 바로 되네요. 클릭을 해보겠습니다. GitHub를 사용해서 로그인하겠습니다. 허용하겠습니다.

새 창이 열리게 되고 이제까지 데모를 해서 보여드렸던 계정으로 로그인하겠습니다. 계속하겠습니다. 비주얼 스튜디오 코드에서 GitHub로 로그인하겠다는 것을 허용해주세요. 이 계정으로 데모를 하겠다는 뜻입니다. Authorize를 하게 되면 다시 비주얼 스튜디오 코드로 돌아갑니다. 이 인증을 앞으로 사용하겠다는 게 되는 것입니다. 이 과정을 통해서 비주얼 스튜디오 코드에서는 GitHub에서 포크한 저장소들이 자동으로 나옵니다. 엔터를 치면 어느 폴더에 클론을 할 것인지 나오게 됩니다.

제 폴더에서 repos라는 폴더가 있을 것입니다. source의 repos이고, 아까 폴더 만든 것들이 있습니다. 여기서 새로 만들기를 해서 vscode-test라는 폴더를 만들고 이 폴더로 위치를 선택하겠습니다. 그러면 클론을 가져오는 것입니다. 어디서 가져오냐면 제가 권한이 있는 ianychoi-dev에 있는 저장소의 내용을 클론해온 것입니다. 비주얼 스튜디오 코드 작업 영역에 추가하겠습니까? 네, 열겠습니다. 비주얼 스튜디오 코드가 열렸습니다.

여기 있는 내용은 어디냐면, 명령 프롬프트에서 cd와 dir을 하게 되면 vscode-test라는 폴더가 만들어졌고, 여기 가보시면 이 폴더 안에 Web-Dev-For-Beginners라는 폴더를 만들어서 이 안에 있는 내용이 그대로 나온 것입니다.

===== [출처 강의: 04_CI_지속적통합_기초] =====
## 영상 1: Github Actions CI/CD - Everything you need to know to get started (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mFFXuXjVgkU)

In today's fast-paced environment it's absolutely essential that we can automate the testing and delivery of our code. That's where GitHub Actions comes in. It's the built-in CI/CD tool for GitHub. If you're unfamiliar with what CI/CD is, it stands for continuous integration and continuous delivery.

Essentially it allows us to automate the testing of our code to make sure it meets certain criteria. After all the tests are passed you can enable actions to automate the delivery of your code. This can significantly reduce the time it takes for you to deliver updates to your application, which allows developers to focus more of their time on the code itself.

In this video we're going to go over all the theory you need to know to understand the GitHub Actions workflow. In the lab portion of this video we'll go over how to implement our own GitHub action and implement a linter that will run checks against our code to make sure that it meets specific criteria.

Let's go over the terminology you need to know to understand a GitHub Actions workflow file. We have a workflow YAML file which specifies events, jobs, runners, steps and actions. An event is a trigger for a workflow. A common event that occurs in a repository is when someone pushes new code. You can see that in this configuration file we specify the workflow to trigger when someone pushes new code.

When the event occurs it's going to run all the jobs within the workflow. In this workflow we have a single job named superlint that specifies multiple steps and actions. You can see underneath the steps there are two actions that are being run. First it's going to check out our code and then it's going to run the super linter against it.

Up here you can see the "runs on" parameter and this is where we specify our runner. Basically this is a container environment that will run our code. By default GitHub runs this container for you but you can host your own runner if you'd like to. The default containers to choose from are Ubuntu Linux, Microsoft Windows and Mac OS.

So to put it all together: on the event that someone pushes new code, it's going to run the job super lint. That job is going to run on an Ubuntu container hosted on GitHub.com and then it's going to go through two steps. The first step is to check out the code and the next step is to run the linter.

By the way if you don't know what a linter is, it's just something that we use to check to make sure that our code is conforming to certain standards. Super linter is made up of multiple linters so it doesn't matter which code you use in your repository. Superlinter is going to understand it and make sure you conform to the standards of that language.

We're on GitHub.com and what we want to do is create a new repository. We want to add a readme file just so we have a file to work with and then create repository. We got this nice clean GitHub repository with the readme file in it.

The next thing we want to do is create a workflow. To do that just go add file and create new file and then we need to be very specific with our naming here. The proper directory structure for your workflow files needs to be first dot GitHub slash workflows and then you can name your file whatever you want. The naming is critical because if your workflow is not triggering it's probably because the directory structure isn't named correctly.

So let's hop back to the main repository here. You should notice that there's this little status icon now and you can see it's yellow. Basically what this is saying is it's currently running the workflow and checking the code. If all the checks pass then this is going to turn green. If the checks fail then it's going to turn red.

You can click on this or you can click on the Actions tab. You can see that it is linting the code base and you can see the exact process that it's on. It's setting up the job, basically just doing the GitHub action stuff and setting everything up. Now it is pulling the code from GitHub superlinter. Once it's done that it's going to check out our code which is our repository and then it's going to run the superlinter against it.

The super linter has run and we can see that everything passed. When we head back to code here we can see we get a nice little checkmark to show that all the workflow checks have passed. This is another really cool thing that you can actually use downstream. You could have your servers monitor the GitHub API and just check the status of the repository. If the status was a green checkmark it could automatically go to that repository and pull down your code and implement it into staging or production or whatever you want.

If you're not familiar with Python that's okay, but there's some syntax problems with this code that is not going to pass the linting check. The first example is there should actually be two lines between each function and we used a tab here and then just used like two spaces here. So the code style isn't very consistent. This is what's considered messy code and the linter is not going to like it.

If we go to the GitHub Actions marketplace, we can see that there's a lot of templated options. You can grab what you think would be good and then just sort of customize it as you go along. That's all we wanted to do for this GitHub Actions introduction.


## 영상 2: The ONLY Continuous Integration (CI) Tutorial you need as an Engineer (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MIWH2CpVyXs)

In this video we're going to learn exactly why we need a CI pipeline in a software development process and how to build one that automatically checks your application code quality and automatically suggests fixes for any issues that it discovers in your code.

Let's say you are in a team of software developers and you're working on a specific feature. The Git workflow that your team is using is trunk-based development, which is a standard workflow in today's modern DevOps-driven development. You always have the main branch in a releasable state that triggers an automated CI/CD pipeline whenever code changes are pushed into the main branch.

So you have a fully streamlined release pipeline with no bottlenecks, meaning no manual intervention at any stage of the pipeline. The pipeline deploys all the way to at least the dev environment and if you have really good test coverage, maybe to the staging or even production environment without any manual testing or code checks in the process.

But for this to work you need to have lots of tests to make sure what you are committing to your main branch can be deployed and released to the end users. Various tests should be run to test different aspects of the code changes that are about to be deployed.

Now what are those tests that we want to run in this release pipeline? You will have unit tests or integration tests that test your code logic with different inputs and parameters to make sure that it's able to handle different scenarios. You may have security tests to scan all your dependencies and libraries for known issues or scan your code for any hardcoded secret data or any security best practices in logic.

Finally you also have code quality tests. Your application code may be working so the functionality is fine, it may be even secure but your code quality may be bad or unmaintainable. Let's say you have lots of code duplications because instead of putting things into a function you are just duplicating the logic in multiple places, which is a bad practice.

Or maybe you are using old APIs or old library versions. Maybe you have introduced risk for null exceptions in your Java application. Maybe you don't have a good test coverage for your code. These are the tests for your code quality.

Trunk-based Git workflow is usually an ideal workflow to use, especially in DevOps-driven projects. However in practice a lot of teams actually use a different Git workflow which is called a feature branch workflow. The core idea behind the feature branch workflow is that all feature branch development should take place in a dedicated branch instead of the main branch.

This way multiple developers or engineers can work on a specific feature without interfering with the main code base. You create a feature branch and make your changes there and when you're ready to merge you create a merge request. All the tests will run on the merge request to act as a gatekeeper and decide whether the changes should be merged into the main.

That's why we want to run those tests on merge requests before the code even ends up in the main branch. Because imagine your code merged into the main branch and then the tests ran and they failed because your code had issues. Those issues were discovered and the pipeline failed but other developers also merged their code changes.

They had just one or two issues but now even if they fix their own issues their code changes cannot be released because your broken code is also in the main branch. So it will block all other code changes from going to development until you fix your code issues.

That's why we want to run tests on the merge request instead of merging it into main and then running the tests. Now imagine feature development takes longer and you have tens of commits. Now you're done, your feature works, you have tested it a little bit manually and now you're ready to merge it into the main and you create a merge request.

The merge request triggers all the tests and those tests detect a ton of issues that you have introduced. Your code works but you copy-pasted some code snippet from the internet with very bad coding practice and even added some security issues to the application. Now you have to go and spend probably hours or days figuring out how to fix those issues.

You could have saved yourself all that time if you tested your code changes right away on the very first commit instead of collecting those commits and then running tests later on the merge request.

So what if you had those tests running even before the merge request, on every single commit in the feature branch? You introduce a library, commit the changes and immediately see through the code scan that this library has issues. Then you make another change, commit and trigger pipeline. It will run test to see if your code changes are fine. If not, you can fix the issue right away and move on to the next one.

Especially as a junior engineer this actually lets you learn so much of programming best practices while you're developing because it gives you this feedback loop of what you are doing wrong. That process of committing small code changes frequently and running tests and scans on them to identify issues is called continuous integration or CI.

The pipeline that runs those tests in order to discover any issues is called a CI pipeline. It is a best practice to build CI pipelines for feature branches. So you aren't deploying anything in the feature branch. Obviously there's no CD (continuous deployment). You're just testing your code changes for any issues frequently to fix them early enough.

We also kept moving those tests earlier and earlier in the development process, which is a general concept of shifting left or shifting automated testing left. There is even an option to find code issues even earlier than in the CI pipeline of a feature branch. You already have this on your local computer as a developer when you use IntelliJ IDE for example, which has built-in code checks that show you while you're developing if you have written dirty code.

IDEs can show you while developing if you have written dirty code which can be cleaned up and made better or more efficient or if you just created a code duplication. Those built-in inspections will even give you auto suggestions to update the library version to the latest or remove the code duplication and so on.

If you have any linter extensions with whatever code editor you're using you can also have that locally in your development environment. Of course we can assume that some developers may ignore those highlights that IDE is showing or they may not even know how to use those auto suggestions.

That's why we want to have those tests in the pipeline to run automatically because we don't want to rely on individual developers doing everything correctly on their local machine. We want to centralize this process and automate it. That's why CI pipelines are so important.

You notice that we have multiple places where the code issues will be detected: starting from local IDE to feature branch CI pipeline, merge request pipeline and even when the code gets merged into the main branch it will run the same code scans and automated tests again.

Why? Because what if other engineers merged their code changes before us? Maybe there is an issue between that new code and ours. So we want to check on every step.

Now that we understand what CI pipeline is and why it's so important let's build one to showcase how we can implement a fully automated code quality checks. For the demo we're going to use GitHub Actions as our CI server to execute the code quality checks. For the code analysis itself we will use a tool called Codana.

Codana has really good code quality checks and is really easy to get started with. Just to give you a quick overview of how it works and how those automated code quality scans will be done: IDEs like IntelliJ, actually all IDEs from JetBrains have built-in inspections that automatically scan the code file by file and identify any code issues and show them in the editor.

They even suggest fixes automatically. Essentially we want to have exactly the same thing but in a centralized place like CI pipeline. Codana, which was also created by JetBrains, is using the same mechanism and inspections that are built in the IDEs. It runs those inspections and identifies any code issues.

As a bonus, imagine you could fix those code issues automatically in the pipeline. Those auto-suggested fixes can be applied in the pipeline where we can tell Codana to actually create a merge request from the automatically suggested fixes. Then you or an experienced engineer can review and merge it into the feature branch to fix all those code issues.

So we're basically automating the code quality fixes. Of course we want this to work for different programming languages. Usually you would have dedicated tools for different programming languages. The good thing about Codana and convenient thing is actually that you can use it for basically all the popular languages like Java, JavaScript, Python and so on.

So you don't have to switch between different tools. This is an open-source project on GitHub. There are two things that we need to do to run the pipeline with code quality checks using Codana. The first one is to create a GitHub workflow.

We're going to create a GitHub Actions workflow for the CI pipeline that will run those code quality checks and the second thing is that we need to create a Codana configuration file called codana.yml that we will pass to that CI pipeline. That's it, super simple to get started with this.

To build our CI pipeline for code quality checks, starting with codana.yml: since we are in IntelliJ we actually have Codana tool and all these configuration options built in the IDE. So tools and Codana and if we click on this option to try run Codana locally, we get this auto-generated codana.yml file.

We can either copy this whole thing or it will just automatically save it in the codana.yml file, which is pretty convenient because we don't have to look up the boilerplate configuration.

The profile is basically a group of inspections mentioned like in IDE. If we go to settings and look for inspections, you have the list of the inspections for different languages, different databases, plus HTML and so on and they are kind of grouped in a profile.

If we remove this we actually have these three options. Depending on how deeply you want to go and how detailed an analysis you want to do, you can choose different profiles. There's a starter one which is checking the most obvious issues, it's kind of lighter version, doesn't go really deep into the code.

Then we have the recommended one which will execute way more inspection against our code. So it will of course detect more issues. Let's choose this one. Actually, the name suggests that it's the recommended one from Codana developers.

The linter which basically is referencing a Docker image that will be used to execute the analysis on all the Java-related files and configuration. If you had a JavaScript project then you would use another linter which is for JavaScript. You can actually see all these images in Docker Hub.

If you had a JavaScript project you would simply use the Codana JS linter which will analyze JavaScript or TypeScript code.

Now we can also let IntelliJ generate code for Codana scan in a CI pipeline. If we click here we actually get options for different CI/CD tools like GitHub Actions, GitLab CI/CD, Jenkins, Team CD and so on. So you can choose whichever CI/CD pipeline you'll be running.

Since our code is on GitHub we're going to be using GitHub Actions of course. We're defining that whenever someone pushes to the master branch, which is the main branch of this repository, or there's a pull request, then we want to execute or trigger this workflow.

In the job section we just have one job called Codana which runs in Ubuntu environment. It has two steps: one of them is just standard action to check out the code because it needs the entire code so that it can analyze all the files. The second one is the actual Codana scan which is using Codana action from GitHub Actions with a specific version tag.

Notice that we also have this token or a secret token here as an environment variable that is passed to the Codana scan. The thing is it's great to run code checks and automated tests to identify any issues. But let's say we have 50 issues that were identified. Going through them in logs is not going to be convenient.

When we run automated tests or code scans we always want to use a visualization tool with a UI where we can see the issues in a nice overview per file with description, maybe with a suggestion on how to fix it. We want to be able to sort it based on the level of severity like how severe the issue is.

Is it critical? Is it low, minor issue? And so on. There are such tools where you can import the test results. In case of Codana, it's actually simpler because it comes with its own cloud platform with a UI where we can see the code issues that were discovered with Codana scan.

We can connect our project to Codana Cloud and it will automatically upload the results of each pipeline run or each job execution of the project to Codana Cloud so we can see the results there. It's very simple to do as well.

In GitHub Actions the way you create environment variables which are sensitive data or secret is very simple. We just go to settings and then here we have secrets and variables for GitHub Actions. We just create a new repository secret.

This way GitHub will have access credentials basically of Codana Cloud to authenticate with it and send the Codana scan execution results, which will be displayed in Codana Cloud.

Now our job has completed and as we can see it was successful. Right here we see the summary of the scan. We have 91 problems detected with different severity levels. These are some of the issues but checking the issues in the logs is actually pretty inconvenient.

So we want to have a nice UI overview. The first one we get is within GitHub itself. We have the UI visualization of the issues again with different severity levels. So it has detected invalid XML configuration with 47 problems.

But of course we want to see details of where each one of those issues is coming from, which file it is, what is the issue and so on. You also have them here in a long list.

But we want to check Codana Cloud and we have this link to detailed Codana report conveniently. So we get a nice display of all the issues right here and these are actually coming from this view. The project that we connected now shows an overview of the last run of the pipeline.

Every time we run the pipeline it will actually save those runs here. We also see that 661 different inspections were done and all these problems were discovered. We can actually click inside each issue and see exactly which file it comes from and what the issue is.

We can also filter. Let's say we want to see those high severity issues. So now we see a more diverse set of issues like visibility issues where a class is exposed outside of defined scope or configuration property cannot be resolved.

Some improvement suggestions in the code. And all these other issues. Now of course you can go through each issue one by one and try to resolve it. In many cases, try to understand whether it is an actual severe issue or not.

If we zoom out we have some moderate problems. We can go to moderate problems and we have some code duplications here and so on.

Finally we want to configure that autofix feature that Codana offers. So we want to show you how it works and it's actually a pretty easy configuration. All we need to do is set some parameters on our Codana job to the Codana action.

We're going to execute this Codana action with argument "apply fixes" and those fixes will be pushed as a pull request in our repository. We have this attribute called "PR mode" here that we are setting to false.

PR mode basically defines whether only the changed files should be analyzed in the pull request. By default it's set to true so we're going to set it to false to analyze not only the changed files.

In order to allow this job to actually create a pull request in the repository we're going to give it permissions or write permissions to create the pull request.

Alternatively you can actually configure this autofix directly in codana.yml configuration file. It's called "fixes strategy" and we have these options. We're going to choose "apply" so we're telling Codana to actually go ahead and apply those automated fixes that it suggests.

After a pipeline execution a new pull request was actually created by Codana which has code changes to fix those issues that it detected. Like making some variables final or getting rid of the if statement where it was not needed.

It actually removed some comments from the code as well and in some other comments it made the link a clickable link. We also have this Java file where it actually imported a library called Lombok to use Setter and Getter annotations instead of writing the setter and getter.

This again makes the code cleaner. Another example of using Lombok: it added some null checks to the parameters.

If you are a junior developer usually the workflow would be that you or another engineer in your team will go through these auto-suggested fixes and you can implement them or merge them into your code.

This would run in a feature branch to scan your commit in the feature branch and Codana will create the pull request to merge into the feature branch again. So all of this is happening before the code even gets to the main branch.

That's basically how all this works. We kind of build up a history of how many issues were discovered whether it's declining or it's increasing. So you'll have all those code scan runs list it right here for a nice overview.

That's basically how you create a CI pipeline that will completely scan your code and identify any code quality issues and even give you fixed suggestions that you can directly merge back into your code.

I hope this tutorial actually helped you to really understand why CI pipeline is needed and as one of the steps that we execute in the CI pipeline which is code quality check. How we integrate a tool like Codana or basically any other tool in your CI workflow to give you a feedback loop.

And help you maintain good quality of your code especially if you have a large team and everyone's doing their own thing. And you have junior engineers who are committing their own changes. So you have this centralized automated process or workflow to help each engineer keep their code changes in check.

Instead of having all the senior engineers checking the code that junior engineers are committing. If you want to dive deeper and start building real-life DevOps pipelines for releasing your applications, I actually have a complete GitHub CI/CD course on it.

If you're interested you can check it out there. Let me know if this was helpful for you in your daily engineering work.


## 영상 3: [10분 테코톡] 찬, 레넌의 CI/CD와 무중단 배포 (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sIPU_VkrguI)

안녕하세요 CI/CD와 무중단배포 발표를 맡은 우아한테크코스 백엔드 4기 찬, 레넌입니다.

저희 발표목차는 다음과 같습니다. 먼저 CI/CD 부분을 제가 맡아서 발표를 하고 이어서 레넌이 무중단 배포 부분 발표를 도와드리겠습니다.

저번 스프린트때 다음과 같은 요구 상황이 있었는데요. 쉘 스크립트 또는 CI 도구를 활용한 배포 자동화. 저희는 대략적인 개념은 알고 있었지만 자세하게는 모르는 상황이었습니다. 이번 테코톡을 기회로 CI/CD와 무중단배포 과정을 공부하기 위해 주제를 이렇게 선정해 보았습니다.

먼저 발표를 진행하기 전에 자주 나오는 용어들에 대해 먼저 정리하고 시작하겠습니다. 컴파일, 빌드, 배포 인데요.

컴파일은 프로그래머가 작성한 소스코드를 기계어로 변환하는 과정입니다. 빌드는 소스코드 파일을 컴퓨터에서 실행할 수 있는 소프트웨어 산출물로 만드는 과정입니다. 보통 빌드안에 컴파일 과정이 포함되어 있습니다.

마지막으로 배포는 빌드의 결과물을 사용자가 접근할 수 있는 환경에 배치하는 것입니다. 쉽게 예를 들자면 영어로 작성된 글을 저희가 쉽게 이해할 수 있는 한글로 번역하는 것이 컴파일 과정이고, 그렇게 번역한 글을 책이라는 산출물로 엮는 것이 빌드입니다. 마지막으로 엮은 책을 독자들이 접근할 수 있는 서점과 같은 환경에 배치하는 것이 배포라고 할 수 있습니다.

그럼 CI에 대해 알아보겠습니다. 1999년 TDD로 유명한 켄트백이 애자일 개발방법론 중 하나인 익스트림 프로그래밍을 제안합니다. 이 당시 미국은 IT붐이 발생했고 그에 따라 고객들의 시시각각 변하는 요구사항을 발 빠르게 대응할 필요가 생겼습니다.

이를 위해 켄트백은 익스트림 프로그래밍을 통해 몇 가지 실천 방안을 제시하는데요. 이 실천방안 중에 저희에게 익숙한 용어들도 몇 가지 볼 수 있습니다. 테스팅, 리팩토링, 페어 프로그래밍 그리고 몇 가지가 더 있고요. 여기서 CI를 보실 수 있습니다.

CI가 무엇일까요 도대체? CI는 지속적 통합이라는 뜻으로 개발을 진행하면서도 품질을 관리할 수 있도록 여러 명이 하나의 코드에 대해서 수정을 진행해도 지속적으로 통합 하면서 관리할 수 있음을 의미합니다.

하지만 이 설명만 봐선 도대체 CI의 어떤 점이 고객의 요구사항에 발 빠르게 대응할 수 있는지 잘 감이 안 오실수도 있습니다. 한번 CI가 없을 때로 가보겠습니다.

CI가 있기 전에 개발자들은 일명 머지데이라는 날을 통해 모든 분기 소스코드를 병합해야 했습니다. 이는 굉장히 많은 수작업이 동반되었고 결과적으로 많은 리소스를 낭비하게 되었습니다.

또한 개발자들이 코드를 병합할 때 개발자의 실수로 에러가 발생하는 코드를 병합하는 과정이 반복이 된다면 맨 마지막 코드에서 에러가 발생했을 경우 어느 부분에서 에러가 발생했는지 디버깅하기 굉장히 어려울 것입니다.

반면에 CI를 활용한다면 업무를 잘게 잘게 쪼개서 코드 작성이 완료될 때마다 이를 빠르게 빠르게 자동으로 병합을 할 수 있을 것입니다.

이제 CI의 필요성을 알았으니 전체적인 CI 과정에 대해 알아보겠습니다. 먼저 개발자가 코드 병합을 요청하면 젠킨스와 같은 CI 툴이 빌드와 테스트를 진행합니다. 이때 이상이 없으면 코드를 병합합니다. 하지만 문제가 발생할 경우 이를 개발자에게 빠르게 피드백해줍니다.

하지만 이러한 CI 툴을 사용한다고 해서 진정한 CI 라고 할 수 없습니다. 마틴 파울러는 다음과 같은 4가지 규칙을 지켜야 진정한 CI 라고 말합니다.

첫째 모든 소스코드가 살아 있고 누구든 현재 소스에 접근할 수 있는 단일 지점을 유지할 것.

둘째 빌드 프로세스를 자동화해서 누구든 소스로부터 시스템을 빌드 할 수 있게 할 것.

셋째 테스팅을 자동화해서 언제든지 시스템에 대한 건전한 테스트 수트를 실행할 수 있게 할 것.

넷째 누구든 현재 실행파일을 얻으면 지금까지 가장 완전한 실행파일을 얻었다는 확신을 하게 할 것.

이 4가지를 지켜야 진정한 CI 라고 말할 수 있을 것입니다.

이제 코드의 통합을 이뤄냈으니 배포만 하면 사용자들은 본인들이 원하는 요구사항을 만족할 수 있을 것입니다.

현재 저희의 서비스의 규모가 작아 1대의 서버에만 배포 하면 되는 상황입니다. 이때는 서버에 들어가 직접 배포 스크립트를 수동으로 실행시켜주면 큰 문제가 없어 보입니다.

하지만 서버의 규모가 커져 서버가 수십, 수백대로 늘어났다고 가정해 보겠습니다. 이때 모든 서버에 일일이 접속해 배포 스크립트를 수동으로 실행시킨다는 것은 굉장히 어려운 작업일 것입니다.

그래서 CI의 연장선의 개념인 CD라는 개념이 등장합니다. CD는 지속적 배포라는 뜻으로 빌드의 결과물을 프로덕션으로 릴리스하는 작업을 자동화하는 것을 의미합니다.

CD에 대해 공부하는 도중 CD가 지속적 제공과 지속적 배포라는 말과 혼용되어 사용되고 있다는 것을 알게 되었습니다. 저희도 이 둘을 구분하는 것이 굉장히 헷갈렸는데요. 이 둘의 차이는 마지막 프로덕션으로 릴리스하는 Deploy 작업의 자동화 여부입니다.

그림을 보시면 지속적 통합에서 빌드와 테스트까지의 자동화가 이루어졌습니다. 이후 빌드의 결과물을 Staging 환경에 자동으로 릴리즈하고 지속적 제공은 여기서 프로덕션으로 릴리즈하는 작업을 수동으로 진행해줘야 합니다.

이 둘 사이에 QA와 같은 행위를 할 수도 있고요. 지속적 배포는 지속적 제공 과는 다르게 마지막으로 프로덕션으로 릴리스하는 Deploy 작업까지 자동화됐다는 것을 알 수 있습니다.

다음은 전체적인 CI/CD 흐름에 대해 알아보겠습니다. 개발자가 코드의 병합을 요청하면 CI/CD 툴이 빌드와 테스트를 진행합니다. 이때 에러가 발생하면 개발자에게 빠르게 피드백을 주고 만약에 이상이 없다면 코드를 병합합니다. 여기까지 CI의 과정과 똑같습니다.

이후 CD 과정을 거쳐 저희의 서버에 자동으로 배포 할 수 있게 됩니다. CI/CD 툴로는 Jenkins, Travis CI, GitHub Actions 등이 있는데요. 자세한 설명은 생략하도록 하겠습니다.

그럼 마지막으로 전체 CI/CD에 대해 정리하겠습니다.

CI는 고객의 요구사항에 빠르게 대응하기 위해 나온 익스트림 프로그래밍의 실천 방안 중 한 가지입니다. 여러명이 하나의 코드에 대해서 수정을 진행해도 지속적으로 통합 하면서 관리할 수 있음을 의미합니다.

CD는 CI의 연장선에 있는 개념으로서 빌드의 결과물을 프로덕션으로 지속적으로 배포하는 것을 의미합니다.

다음으로 무중단 배포는 계속해서 설명 해드리겠습니다. 앞서 CI/CD에 대해 잘 설명해 주었는데요. 하지만 아직까지 문제점이 하나 남아 있습니다.

앞서 설명드린 배포 자동화를 통해 서비스를 운영하고 있다고 가정해 보겠습니다. 새로운 서비스를 배포하기 위해서는 기존 서비스를 종료하고 새로운 서비스를 시작해야 합니다. 하지만 이 두 행위 사이에는 다운타임이라는 것이 발생하게 됩니다.

다운타임 동안 사용자들은 저희 서비스를 이용하지 못하게 됩니다. 이를 해결하기 위해 나온 개념이 무중단배포 입니다.

그래서 무중단 배포 구현 방법에는 AWS에서 Blue-Green을 활용한 무중단 배포 방법, 도커를 이용한 무중단 배포 방법, L4, L7 스위치를 이용한 무중단 배포 방법, 그리고 Nginx를 이용한 무중단 배포 방법 등등이 있는데요.

마지막에 보이는 이 방법이 쉽고 저렴하다는 점에서 많이 사용되고 있는 것 같았습니다.

그래서 무중단배포를 설명드리기에 앞서 무중단배포를 공부하면서 자주 나왔던 용어에 대해 설명드리도록 하겠습니다.

먼저 리버스 프록시 입니다. 리버스 프록시는 인터넷과 서버 사이에 위치한 중계서버로 클라이언트가 요청한 내용을 캐싱합니다. 그리고 서버 정보를 클라이언트로부터 숨길 수 있어 보안에 용이합니다.

그림을 보시면 클라이언트가 요청을 보내면 리버스 프록시가 이를 서버에 대신 전달해 줍니다. 서버에 입장에서 클라이언트로부터 직접 요청을 받는 것이 아닌 리버스 프록시라는 대리서버를 통해 요청을 받기 때문에 보안에 굉장히 용이하다고 할 수 있습니다.

다음으로 로드 밸런싱이라는 개념인데요. 로드 밸런싱은 부하분산 이라는 뜻으로 서버에 가해지는 부하를 분산해주는 역할을 합니다. 하나의 서버가 멈추더라도 서비스 중단 없이 다른 서버가 서비스를 계속 유지할 수 있는 무중단배포를 가능케 해줍니다.

그래서 그림을 보시면 클라이언트가 요청을 보내면 로드 밸런서라는 친구가 요청을 위아래로 분산해주는 모습을 보실 수 있습니다. 로드 밸런싱 알고리즘에 대해서도 여러 가지가 있는데요. 이 그림에서 적용한 알고리즘은 라운드로빈 방식의 알고리즘입니다.

추가로 알고리즘에 대해 학습하고 싶으신분들은 로드 밸런싱 알고리즘이라는 키워드로 학습해보시면 좋을 것 같습니다.

이제 본격적으로 무중단배포 방식에 대해 설명드리도록 하겠습니다. 무중단배포 방식에는 Rolling 배포, Canary 배포, Blue/Green 배포 이렇게 세 가지가 있습니다.

먼저 Rolling 배포에 대해 설명드리도록 하겠습니다. Rolling 배포는 무중단배포의 가장 기본적인 방식으로 서버를 차례대로 업데이트시키는 방식입니다.

현재 저희가 세대의 서버를 통해 서비스를 운영중이라고 가정해 보겠습니다. Rolling 배포를 적용시키기 위해서는 세대의 서버 중 한대의 서버에 로드 밸런싱을 라우팅하지 않도록 설정해 줍니다. 그 다음 이 서버를 새로운 버전으로 업데이트 시켜줍니다. 그 후 다시 라우팅 설정을 통해 다시 추가해 줍니다.

두 번째 서버도 마찬가지로 업데이트 시켜준 후 라우팅하도록 설정해 줍니다. 세 번째 서버도 업데이트를 시켜주고 다시 라우팅을 추가하도록 해 줍니다.

보신 바와 같이 Rolling 배포는 이 세대의 서버를 차례대로 업데이트시키는 방식입니다. 그래서 Rolling 배포의 장점은 인스턴스를 추가하지 않아도 돼서 관리가 간편하다는 점이 있습니다. 하지만 사용 중인 인스턴스의 트래픽이 몰릴 수 있다는 단점이 있고, 구버전과 신버전의 공존으로 인한 호환성문제가 발생할 수 있습니다.

다음으로 Canary 배포 입니다. Canary 배포는 옛날 광부들이 유독가스에 민감한 카나리아 새를 이용해 가스누출위험을 감지했던 것에서 유래해서 잠재적인 문제들에 대해 미리 대비하고자 나온 방식입니다. 신버전을 소수의 사용자들에게만 배포하고 문제가 없는 것이 확인되면 점진적으로 다른 서버에 신버전을 배포하는 방식입니다.

Canary 배포도 Rolling 배포와 마찬가지로 첫번째 서버에는 라우팅을 하지 않도록 설정한 후 서버를 업데이트 시켜주고 다시 라우팅하도록 설정해 줍니다. 그래서 이 과정에서 이 업데이트된 서버가 문제없이 정상적으로 잘 작동된다는 것이 확인되면 나머지 서버에도 업데이트를 시켜주는 방식입니다.

그래서 Canary 배포의 장점으로는 문제 상황을 빠르게 감지할 수 있습니다. 그리고 A/B 테스트로도 활용이 가능합니다. 하지만 모니터링 관리 비용이 들고, Rolling 배포와 마찬가지로 구버전과 신버전의 공존으로 인한 호환성 문제가 발생할 수 있습니다.

마지막으로 Blue/Green 배포 입니다. Blue를 구버전 Green을 신버전으로 지칭합니다. 구버전과 동일하게 신버전의 인스턴스를 구성합니다. 신버전 배포시 로드 밸런서를 통해 신버전으로만 트래픽을 전환하는 방식입니다.

그림을 보시면 위쪽에는 현재 서비스 중인 서버의 그룹이 있습니다. 아래쪽에는 현재 운영되고 있지 않은 대기중인 서버 가 있습니다. 이 상황에서 새로운 서버를 적용 시키고 싶다면 아래에 있는 대기중인 서버에 먼저 새로운 버전으로 업데이트 시켜줍니다.

그 후 위쪽으로 향하고 있던 트래픽을 아래쪽으로 변경 시켜주기만하면 Blue/Green 배포를 하실 수 있습니다. 그렇게 되면 위쪽에 있는 그룹이 대기중인 서버가 되고 아래쪽에 있는 그룹이 서비스 중인 서버가 되겠죠.

그래서 위에서 다시 대기중인 서버가 된 그룹을 다음 새로운 서비스로 업데이트시킬 때 활용할 수 있습니다.

Blue/Green 배포의 장점은 배포하는 속도가 빠르고 신속하게 롤백이 가능하다는 점입니다. 또 남아있는 기존 버전의 환경을 다음 배포에 재사용할 수 있습니다. 하지만 시스템 자원이 두 배로 필요하다는 점이 단점으로 작용합니다.

마지막으로 정리를 한번 해보자면 무중단배포는 다운타임 없이 서버를 운영할 수 있게 해주는 배포 방식입니다. 배포 방식에는 Rolling, Canary, Blue-Green 방식이 있습니다.

리버스 프록시는 클라이언트의 요청을 대신 받아와 서버에 전달하는 대리서버 입니다. 그리고 로드 밸런싱은 클라이언트의 요청을 여러 서버에 분산해주는 역할을 합니다.

===== [출처 강의: 05_CD_지속적배포_기초] =====
## 영상 1: Jez Humble – Continuous Delivery (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=skLJuksCRTw)

[계속적 전달(Continuous Delivery) 개념 및 실제 사례]

Thoughtworks에서의 초기 프로젝트 사례: ISP 회사의 J2EE 시스템 재구축. Windows 개발환경에서 Solaris 배포로 인한 호환성 문제 발생. 초기 배포 시도는 2주가 소요되었고 실패함. 배포 후 피드백 지연(2-3주)으로 인한 버그 수정의 어려움.

자동화 솔루션: Conan the Deployer라는 Bash 기반 배포 자동화 스크립트 개발. 결과적으로 배포 시간을 1시간으로 단축하고 롤백을 1초 이내로 가능하게 함. 주말 배포 필요성 제거.

지속적 배포의 핵심 개념:
- 빌드-측정-반복(Build-Measure-Learn) 루프 최적화
- Lead time (코드 커밋에서 프로덕션 배포까지의 시간) 최소화
- 배치 사이즈 감소로 인한 배포 위험도 감소

Flickr 사례: 하루 10회 이상 배포 가능. Yahoo 인수 후에도 높은 가용성 유지. 안정성과 높은 배포 빈도가 상충하지 않음을 증명.

소프트웨어 낭비 문제: 기능의 50% 이상이 사용되지 않거나 거의 사용되지 않음. 린 스타트업 방식의 가설검증 필요.

배포 파이프라인 구조:
1. CI(지속적 통합): 코드 변경 시 자동 빌드 및 단위 테스트 실행
2. 다양한 테스트 계층: 단위 테스트, 통합 테스트, 기능 테스트, 성능 테스트
3. 배포 준비: 모든 검증 통과 후 프로덕션 배포 가능 상태

DevOps 문화: 개발팀(처리량 최적화)과 운영팀(안정성 최적화) 간 협력의 필요성.

저위험 배포 패턴:
- Blue-Green 배포: 구 버전과 신 버전을 병행 운영 후 전환
- 데이터베이스 마이그레이션: 추가 컬럼 생성 후 점진적 데이터 이동
- Feature Toggle: 배포된 기능을 선택적으로 활성화/비활성화

배포와 릴리즈의 분리: 기능을 배포했다고 해서 즉시 모든 사용자에게 공개하지 않음. Facebook 사례: 신기능을 1% 사용자부터 시작해 점진적 확대.

성공 사례: 배포 자동화로 팀의 피드백 속도 향상, 프로덕션 환경의 신뢰도 증가.

---

## 영상 2: 제대로 이해하는 CI / CD | 개발자필수지식 (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KTHZyV9yJGY)

[CI/CD 파이프라인 기본 개념 및 구현]

다중 개발자 환경의 문제점:
- 개발 서버의 상태 불일치: 한 개발자의 변경사항이 다른 개발자의 로컬 환경에 반영되지 않음
- 테스트 코드 부재로 인한 미검증 코드 배포: 사용자에게 영향을 미치는 버그 발생
- 배포 프로세스의 비체계성

CI/CD 파이프라인의 정의:
- CI (Continuous Integration): 코드를 빌드하고 테스트하는 과정
- CD (Continuous Delivery): 최종 코드 산출물을 저장소에 릴리스
- CD (Continuous Deployment): 실제 사용자 서비스에 배포

파이프라인의 장점:
- 체계적인 배포 흐름: 빌드→테스트→머지→딜리버리→디플로이먼트
- 문제 발생 시 신속한 식별 및 해결
- 테스트 코드 필수화: 테스트 통과 없이 코드 머지 차단

빌드 프로세스 (Webpack 예시):
- Vue.js 모듈을 HTML, CSS, JavaScript로 변환
- 개발 환경과 프로덕션 환경의 차이 해소

테스트 타입:
1. 단위 테스트(Unit Test): 개별 함수 검증
2. 통합 테스트(Integration Test): 모듈 간 상호작용 검증
3. 엔드-투-엔드 테스트(E2E Test): 실제 사용자 시나리오 검증

Mocha 프레임워크를 이용한 테스트 작성: 배열의 indexOf 메서드 검증 사례.

머지(Merge) 전략:
- 충돌 최소화: 개발자별 담당 폴더 분리
- 작은 단위의 머지: 한 달 단위가 아닌 이슈 단위로 분할
- 충돌 해결: 화면 공유를 통한 협력적 해결

배포 도구:
- GitHub Actions
- Jenkins
- CircleCI
- Heroku (PaaS로 CI/CD 자동화)

실전 예시: Vue.js 프로젝트의 전체 CI/CD 파이프라인
1. 로컬 개발: npm run dev로 테스트 환경 구성
2. 빌드: npm run build로 프로덕션 번들 생성 (웹팩 사용)
3. 머지: 커밋 및 깃 푸시
4. 자동 배포: Heroku와 GitHub 연동으로 자동 배포

Delivery vs Deployment 개념:
- Delivery: 최종 코드를 메인 브랜치에 저장 (릴리스)
- Deployment: 실제 사용자가 접근 가능한 서버에 배포

CI/CD 파이프라인의 흐름:
- 코드 작성 및 테스팅 (개발 환경)
- 빌드 (웹팩 등으로 정적 자산 생성)
- 테스트 (Mocha로 자동 검증)
- 머지 (버전 관리 시스템에 통합)
- 릴리스 및 배포 (사용자 접근 가능)

---

## 영상 3: Jenkins로 DevOps 구현하기 || Jenkins에서 DevOps 지속적 배포 파이프라인 만들기 (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4Nq8QbBtySU)

[Jenkins를 이용한 실제 배포 파이프라인 구축]

Delivery Pipeline 개념:
- Jenkins 플러그인(Delivery Pipeline v1.4.0)을 통한 시각화
- 여러 자동화 작업을 연쇄적으로 연결

Jenkins 파이프라인 구성 요소:
- 코드 풀(Code Pull): SVN 버전 관리 시스템에서 소스 코드 추출
- 빌드(Create Build): Maven을 사용한 WAR 파일 생성
- 정적 코드 분석(Static Code Review): SonarQube 통합으로 코드 품질 검증
- 애플리케이션 배포(Deploy on Application Server): Tomcat 서버에 애플리케이션 배포

빌드 트리거 방식:
1. 수동 트리거: 개발자가 수동으로 파이프라인 실행
2. 정기 실행: Cron 문법으로 특정 시간에 자동 실행 (예: 매일 밤 9시)
3. Poll SCM: 버전 관리 시스템을 주기적으로 확인하여 변경사항이 있으면 자동 실행

개별 작업 실행 시간 추적:
- 전체 빌드 시간 표시: 마지막 실행 기준 2분
- 단계별 시간 분석: Code Pull (29초), Create Build (8초), Static Code Review (24초)

SonarQube 통합:
- 코드 품질 대시보드
- 버그 식별 (예: 1개 버그, 162개 Code Smell 발견)
- 소스 파일 및 메서드 단위의 문제점 추적
- 코드 커버리지 및 중복 분석

파이프라인 실행 흐름:
1. 초기 단계 완료 (Code Pull) → 다음 단계 실행
2. 다중 종속성 지정: 두 개 이상의 작업을 동시 실행 후 다음 단계로 진행

병렬 실행 기능:
- Create Build 완료 후 Static Code Review와 Unit Testing이 동시 실행
- 두 작업이 모두 완료되어야 Deploy on Application Server 실행
- 하나의 작업이 실패하면 다음 단계 차단

Maven과 Ant 통합:
- Maven 설정 파일(pom.xml)에 Ant 스크립트 포함
- Tomcat 제어 (시작, 중지, 재시작)
- 프로덕션 배포 스크립트 실행

Tomcat 애플리케이션 배포:
- 컨테이너 시작 및 컴포넌트 로딩
- 애플리케이션 서버의 상태 모니터링
- 배포 중 단계별 로그 출력

파이프라인 수정 및 확장:
- 기존 파이프라인에 새로운 작업 추가 가능
- 순차 실행과 병렬 실행의 유연한 조합
- 작업 간 의존성 설정으로 복잡한 워크플로우 구성

실시간 모니터링:
- 현재 실행 상태 표시
- 각 단계의 소요 시간 실시간 추적
- 콘솔 출력을 통한 상세 로그 확인

파이프라인의 제어 기능:
- 특정 단계의 실행 또는 스킵
- 진행 중인 작업 중단
- 다음 단계로의 자동/수동 진행 선택

Jenkins Delivery Pipeline의 주요 이점:
- 시각적 파이프라인 구성으로 복잡한 워크플로우 단순화
- 모든 DevOps 자동화 작업을 한곳에서 관리
- 기술 지식 없이도 파이프라인 생성 가능
- 실시간 진행 상황 추적 및 병목 식별
- 코드 품질(SonarQube), 빌드, 배포를 통합 자동화

---

## 자막 추출 요약

3개 영상의 자막을 추출 및 정리했습니다:

1. **skLJuksCRTw (영어)**: Jez Humble의 "Continuous Delivery" 강연
   - 배포 자동화의 역사적 배경과 개념 정립
   - Lead time 최적화, 배치 사이즈 감소
   - Feature Toggle, Blue-Green 배포 등 저위험 배포 패턴

2. **KTHZyV9yJGY (한국어)**: "제대로 이해하는 CI/CD"
   - CI/CD 파이프라인의 단계별 구조
   - Webpack, Mocha, Git을 이용한 실제 구현
   - 개발 환경에서 프로덕션까지의 전체 흐름

3. **4Nq8QbBtySU (영어)**: "Jenkins로 DevOps 구현하기"
   - Jenkins Delivery Pipeline 플러그인 활용
   - SVN, Maven, SonarQube, Tomcat 통합
   - 병렬 실행, 실시간 모니터링, 작업 제어 기능

세 영상은 각각 개념 설명, 간단한 구현, 실제 엔터프라이즈 도구를 다루고 있어 CD(지속적 배포) 기초 강의를 위한 종합적인 자료를 제공합니다.
