## 영상 1: Istio & Service Mesh - simply explained in 15 mins (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=16fgzklcF7Y)

in this video you will learn about
service mesh and one of its
implementations
which is istio in order to understand
the concepts
we will first look at the challenges of
a microservices application
and then we will see how different
features of a service mesh
solve these challenges we will look at
how istio implements service mesh
and learn about istio architecture as
well as how to configure
istio for our microservices application
istio is
a service mesh so in order to understand
istio we need to understand what service
mesh is
service mesh is a popular solution for
managing communication between
individual microservices in a micro
service application
so why do we need a dedicated tool for
microservices communication
and what are the challenges here
now when we move from monolith to
microservices application
we introduced a couple of new challenges
that we didn't have
with a monolith application and let's
say we have
an online shop application which is made
up of several micro services
we have the web server that gets the ui
requests
payment microservice that handles the
payment logic
let's say we have a shopping cart
product inventory
and database and probably some more
services
and we're deploying our micro service
application inside a kubernetes cluster
now what does our micro service
application setup need
to run successfully or what are some of
the required
configurations for such an application
first of all each micro service has its
own business logic right
payment service handles the payment
logic web server handles ui requests
database persist data and so on now
services need to talk to each other
when user puts stuff in the shopping
cart request is received by the web
server
which hands it over to the shopping cart
microservice
which will talk to the database to
persist the data so how do services
know how to talk to each other what is
the endpoint of each
service all the service endpoints that
web server talks to
must be configured for web server so
when we add a new micro service
we need to add the endpoint of that new
service to all the microservices
that need to talk to it so we have that
information as part of the application
deployment
code now what about security in our
microservice application setup
generally a common environment in many
projects will look like this
you have firewall rules set up for your
kubernetes cluster
maybe you have a proxy as entry point
that gets the request first so cluster
can't be
accessed directly so you have security
around the cluster
however once request gets inside the
cluster the communication is insecure
microservices talk to each other over
http or some other insecure protocol
also services talk to each other freely
every service inside the cluster can
talk to any other service so there are
no restrictions on that
so this means that from security
perspective
if an attacker gets inside the cluster
it can do anything because we don't have
any additional security inside
and maybe for small applications they
don't really have any sensitive user
data
it may be okay but for more important
applications like
online banks or apps with lots of
personal user data
a higher level of security is very
important
so you want everything to be as secure
as possible
so again additional configuration inside
each application is needed to secure
communication between
services within the cluster you also
need
retry logic in each microservice to make
the whole application
more robust if one microservice is
unreachable or you lose connection for a
bit you want to retry the connection
so developers will add this retry logic
also to the services what about metrics
for your services you want to be able to
monitor how the services are performing
what http errors are you getting how
many requests are your microservices
receiving
or sending or how long does a request
take
to identify the bottlenecks in your
application
so development team may add a monitoring
logic
for prometheus for example using
prometheus client library
and collect tracing data using a tracing
library like zipkin for example
so as you see teams of developers of
each microservice
need to add all this logic to each
service
and maybe configure some additional
stuff in the cluster to handle
all these very important challenges in
the microservices application
and this means that developers of
microservices are not working
on the actual service logic but are busy
adding network logic for metrics and
security and communication etc
for each microservice which also adds
complexity to the services instead of
keeping them simple and lightweight
now wouldn't it make more sense to
extract all the non-business logic
out of the microservices and into its
own
small sitecar application that handles
all these logic and acts as a proxy and
this small application
is a third party application the cluster
operators
can easily configure through a simple
api without worrying about how the logic
is implemented and developers can now
focus on developing the
actual business logic and note that you
don't have to add this sidecar
configuration to your
micro service deployment yaml file
because
service mesh has a control plane that
will automatically
inject this proxy in every microservice
pod
so now the microservices can talk to
each other
through those proxies and the network
layer
for service to service communication
consisting of
control plane and the proxies is a
service mesh
in addition to the above features one of
the most important features of a service
mesh
is traffic split configuration so what
is a traffic split
when changes are made to a payment
microservice for example
a new version is built tested and
deployed to a production environment
right
now of course you can rely on tests to
validate
the new version but what if the new
version has a bug that you couldn't
catch with the tests
happens very often depending on the test
coverage so in this
case you don't want to end up with a new
version of payment service in production
that doesn't work it may cost your
company a lot of money
so you want to send maybe only one
percent or 10
traffic to the new version for a period
of time
to make sure it really works so with
you can easily configure a web server
micro service
to direct 90 of traffic to the payment
version 2.0 and 10 of traffic
to the version 3.0 which is also known
as
canary deployment
and as i mentioned at the beginning
is just a pattern or a paradigm
and istio is one of its implementations
and in istio architecture the proxies
are invoice proxies which is an
independent open source project
that istio as well as many other service
mesh implementations also use
and the control plane component in istio
is
istio d which manages and injects the
envoy proxies
in each of the microservice pods
now note here that in earlier versions
of
istio up to version 1.5
istio control plane was a bundle of
multiple
components you had the citadel
mixer galley and some other components
so you had multiple pods when you
deployed istio
however in version 1.5 all of these
separate components were combined back
into
one single stod component to make it
easier
for the operators to configure and
operate istio so if you have read
articles or watch videos where all these
components are explained
separately note that this is only
relevant for the earlier versions now
you only worry about
one single istio d component
so istio architecture is comprised of
the control
plane which has esteod component and
control plane manages a data plane
which is group of all the invoice
proxies
so now the question is how do we
configure all these above features
for our micro services in istio as i
mentioned
you don't have to adjust deployment and
service dml files for your micro
so all the configuration for easter
components will be done in istio itself
again having a clear separation between
the application logic
and configuration and the service mesh
logic and configuration
and the great thing is that istio can be
configured
with kubernetes yaml files because it
uses
crds by extending kubernetes api
crd is basically a custom resource or
custom component in kubernetes that can
be used
to allow configuring these third-party
technologies like istio
prometheus etc using the same kubernetes
yaml files
and apply them using cube ctl without
having to learn a technology specific
configuration language
and adjusting that configuration
directly inside istio for example
so using a few sdo crds
we can configure different traffic
routing rules
between our microservices like which
services can talk to each other
traffic split configuration the retry
rules
timeouts and many other network
configurations
and there are two main crds for
configuring
service to service communication virtual
which configures how to route the
traffic to a specific service
and once that traffic is actually routed
to that service
on top of that using destination rule
component
we can configure some policies on that
traffic light what kind of load
balancing to use
to talk to the pods behind the
destination service
so overall as you see we create
these crds custom resource definitions
in kubernetes
that istiod component which is is the
control plane
will read and convert into
invoice specific configuration and send
that configuration
out to all the invoice proxies so we
don't configure
proxies we configure control plane and
control plane itself
will then push that configuration out to
all individual
invoice proxies and the proxies
themselves
can now communicate with each other by
applying this configuration
that we define without having
to go back to the easter control plane
so they can independently talk to each
other
because they have all the logic and
configuration they need
without talking to the control plane
in addition to configuring the proxies
stod also has a central registry for all
the
microservices so instead of statically
configuring the endpoints
for each microservice when a new
gets deployed it will automatically get
registered
in the service registry without the need
of any additional configuration from our
site because
istio automatically detects the services
and endpoints in the cluster
and using this service registry the
envoy proxies can now
query the endpoints to send the traffic
to the relevant services
in addition to this dynamic service
discovery feature
istiod also acts as a ca as a
certificate authority
and generates certificates for all the
microservices
in the cluster to allow secured tls
proxies of those microservices and
finally sdod gets metrics and tracing
from the invoice proxies that it
gathers they can be later consumed by
monitoring server like
prometheus or tracing servers etc
to have out-of-the-box metrics and
tracing
data for your whole microservice
istio has another component called istio
ingress gateway
that basically is an entry point into
your kubernetes cluster
you can think of the istio ingress
gateway as an alternative
to nginx ingress controller so istio
gateway
runs as a pod in your cluster and
acts as a load balancer by accepting
incoming traffic in your cluster
and gateway will then direct traffic to
one of your microservices inside the
cluster
using virtual service component
and you can configure istio gateway
using
a gateway crd
so now the traffic flow in your
with all these istio components will
look like this
so user will initiate a request to
a web server microservice in your
the request will first hit the gateway
because it's that entry point
of the cluster gateway will then
evaluate
the virtual service rules about how to
route the traffic
and will send it to web server
microservice and finally that request
will reach
the proxy the invoice proxy inside your
web server
micro service the invoice proxy will
evaluate the request
and forward it to the actual
web server container within the same pod
using localhost now the web server will
initiate another request to a payment
so the request will move from
web server container to the web server
proxy
which will then by applying the virtual
service rules as well as
destination rules and maybe some other
configuration
will communicate with the proxy
envoy proxy of payment microservice
using mutual tls and the same will
repeat for communication between the
payment service and
database and all the way back the
response will be
returned to the ui and during this
overall request flow
the proxies will gather all the metrics
and tracing information
about the requests and send it back to
the control plane
so we automatically have monitoring for
our application
so that's it for this video subscribe to
my channel for
more content like this and if you want
to see
behind the scenes content and previews
follow me on instagram as well
thank you and see you in the next video

## 영상 2: Istio Tutorial (Service Mesh - Ingress Gateway - Virtual Service - Gateway - Ingress - mTLS) (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H4YIKwAQMKk)

Hello and welcome to my channel!
In this video, we'll explore what Istio is,
how it works, and how it can benefit your
microservices architecture.
First, we'll talk about istio architecture
and how it works under the hood.
Then I'll show you multiple methods on how
to install istio on Kubernetes cluster, including
helm installation.
I'll walk you through a few examples of how
to manage traffic, request routing, and canary
deployment.
And we'll talk about multiple ways to inject
sidecars into the pod.
One of the biggest topics of this tutorial
is how to use an ingress gateway to expose
applications running in Kubernetes to the
internet.
We'll install cert-manager and use letsencrypt
to automatically obtain TLS certificates and
secure our APIs.
Finally, I'll show you how to use Prometheus
and grafana to monitor latency, traffic, and
availability not only of the services exposed
to the internet but also of internal applications.
And, of course, we'll use kiali to visualize
the service mesh inside our cluster.
In the end, we'll talk about Gateway API and
how to use it for both service mesh and instead
of your typical ingress.
So what istio is?
Istio is an open-source service mesh that
provides a unified platform to connect, manage,
and secure microservices.
It was created by Google, IBM, and Lyft in
2017 and has since gained significant traction
in the cloud-native community.
Istio is built on top of Envoy - a high-performance
proxy that handles all the traffic between
microservices.
Istio works by deploying a sidecar container
alongside each microservice instance in your
environment.
The sidecar container intercepts all traffic
to and from the microservice, handling traffic
routing, load balancing, service discovery,
and other important networking tasks.
Istio also provides advanced traffic management
features like canary deployments, A/B testing,
and fault injection.
Now, why would you want to use Istio?
Istio provides several benefits to modern
Firstly, it simplifies network management
by abstracting away the complexity of service
discovery, load balancing, and traffic routing.
Secondly, Istio provides advanced security
features like mutual TLS authentication, role-based
access control, and traffic encryption.
Finally, Istio provides observability features
like distributed tracing, metrics collection,
and logging.
Since the istio operator is deprecated, most
people would prefer helm installation.
It's pretty easy to include in your deployment
pipeline with other terraform resources.
You can use istioctl to try it out, but realistically
you'd probably still use helm to deploy it
in production environments.
This step is optional only to show you how
to get default helm values.
Let's go ahead and add the official helm repo.
Now let's search for the base helm chart that
includes the custom resource definitions,
which are mandatory to install before you
can deploy istiod.
I highly recommend using the same version
for the first try; otherwise, the ingress
gateway may not work for you.
We can use helm show values to get defaults
for this helm chart and pipe it to the file.
Let's call it istio-base-defaults.yaml.
You can open it and find values that you want
to customize.
It's pretty basic.
For this video, I'm going to be using the
EKS cluster that you can create using my terraform
code.
Now I'll use terraform as well to deploy the
istio helm chart.
You can put it in the same folder or follow
along.
First of all, we need to declare the helm
provider.
To authenticate with Kubernetes cluster such
as EKS, we can dynamically obtain a temporary
token and then use it to install helm.
Another way is just to point the provider
to Kubernetes config on your local machine.
Next, create a new file for the first istio
base helm chart.
You don't have to use terraform; you can copy
a command that exactly matches terraform and
execute it in the terminal.
I prefer to use terraform to make it easily
reproducible.
Let's call this release my-istio-base.
Point to the remote helm repository.
Specify what helm chart you want to use.
Then the Kubernetes namespace.
If it does not exist, let's create it.
Also, make sure to use the same version.
Just in case if you want to override any variables,
you can use set statements.
For example, set the default namespace for
the istio deployment.
Recently istio team combined the pilot, citadel,
and gallery into a single executable called
istiod.
Let's get the default values for it as well
and use the same version.
We would need to override a few variables
for the ingress gateway to work.
Create another terraform file to deploy the
istiod helm chart.
You can also find the helm command to deploy
it manually.
Telemetry and namespace are default values,
but we need to override the ingress service
and ingress selector for the cert-manager
to work correctly and be able to solve the
http01 challenge from letsencrypt.
Also, we need to explicitly depend on the
previous helm chart since istiod requires
custom resources.
In the terminal, you need to initialize terraform
first.
Then run apply to deploy both helm charts.
Let's check if the istio custom resources
were created.
Also, we need to make sure that the istiod
pod is running.
Alright, istio is deployed to our cluster,
and we're ready to start managing traffic
using the istio control plane.
Let's create a dedicated namespace for our
first example and call it staging.
If you want istio to inject sidecars to all
pods in this namespace, you add an injection
enabled label.
In order for istio to manage traffic, each
service must have an istio sidecar.
We'll have two deployments to simulate a canary.
This deployment is version v1.
Also, when we get to the kiali, you would
want these labels to show up in the UI.
It's a simple golang app that is uploaded
to the docker hub.
Since it's a public image, you can use it
as well.
The second deployment is identical, except
that it uses the v2 version label.
When we create this standard service in Kubernetes,
since it uses a single label app: first-app,
it randomly routes traffic to both versions
v1 and v2.
To manage and shift traffic, we actually need
a couple of istio custom resources.
The destination rule defines what backend
applications are used.
They call it subsets.
We have a subset for the v1 version, which
is also called v1, and another one for v2.
You also need to add a target host; in this
case, it's a service name first-app.
You can get all the values from the official
istio documentation.
The second custom resource is virtual service.
First, we also need to use the same target
host.
Same as in the previous example, it will target
Kubernetes service first-app.
Then we can intelligently route traffic to
different backends.
For this example, we'll simulate a typical
application upgrade when you need to roll
out a new version of the app, in this case,
v2, and start shifting traffic to it.
Sometimes it's called canary deployment.
When the traffic hits the new version, you
can monitor status codes and decide if you
want to proceed or abort.
Alright, let's start routing traffic to only
version v1.
Now to test, we need a client inside Kubernetes,
which also have a sidecar. Port forward won't
work in this case.
Later we'll use a gateway.
Let's go ahead and apply the example-1 folder.
Check the status of the pods in the staging
namespace.
If you add a wide flag, you can get the internal
IP addresses of the pods.
Take note of those two.
We also have a single Kubernetes service in
that namespace.
If you check endpoints on that service, you'll
get two pods.
So if you access this service without a sidecar,
you would randomly receive traffic from both
versions, v1, and v2.
For the test, ssh to the client in the backend
That pod is based on a curl image and has
an infinite loop to prevent it from exiting.
Let's use curl in the loop to hit our first-app
service in the staging namespace.
Since we used istio virtual service, traffic
is only routed to v1 version.
Later I'll show you how to visualize this
traffic in the UI.
Now let's say we want to upgrade our app to
version v2.
First, we want to route a small percentage
of the traffic to that version and make sure
it's healthy.
Add weight attribute with 90% value.
Also, add another destination rule that will
send traffic to the v2 version but only 10%
of the traffic.
Everything is ready; let's apply the new destination
rules.
On the bottom window, you can see that v2
versions rarely appear.
Since we only route 10% of traffic to that
version.
Without istio to implement the same task,
you would scale version v1 to 9 pods and create
a single pod for v2.
Well, you can have any number of pods just
need to keep the ratio.
With istio, it does not matter how many pods
you have.
You can still intelligently route traffic.
Let's say we are now confident that the v2
version has no bugs.
Now we can start routing half of the traffic
to the new version.
And of course, you can automate this in your
pipeline, but first, you need to understand
how it works.
Let's apply it again.
Now we receive an equal amount of traffic
on both versions.
Also, you can implement similar routing with
Gateway API but with experimental custom resources
only.
We'll talk about technics at the end of the
video.
At this point, we are confident in our new
version, and we want to route all the traffic
to it.
Apply it again, and you'll see immediately
that all the traffic is now routed to the
v2 version.
In this section, I want to talk about multiple
ways you can inject sidecars into your pods.
The first one and most common is to use inject
label.
You can also set the value to disable, and
other methods won't work either.
The second method is to use a pod inject enabled
Now the third one is to inject manually.
But you should use it only when you are trying
to test something.
For example, this deployment does not have
labels, and istio, should not inject the sidecar.
Let's apply and see the result.
Alright.
the first deployment has a sidecar, and the
second one does not.
To manually inject sidecar, you need to use
istioctl cli and specify the path to that
If you get the pods in a few seconds, you
should see that the istio sidecar was injected
into the second pod.
In the following section, I want to show you
how to expose an application running in Kubernetes
to the internet using the istio ingress gateway.
We'll also use the helm chart to deploy it
in our cluster.
Similar to the previous charts, let's save
the default values locally.
Just in case if you want to override some
of them.
I'll keep all default values for the gateway.
For example, you can use service annotations
to specify what kind of load balancer you
want.
In AWS, you probably want to upgrade classic
LB to a network load balancer.
Create another terraform file for gateway
As you can see, I'm not going to override
any values in this deployment.
Keep a note that we'll deploy it to the istio-ingress
Let's run terraform apply to install the helm
chart.
Now we can check if the load balancer was
created.
If it's in the pending state, try to describe
it and find any errors.
You can also get events in that namespace.
For the third example, we'll use the production
namespace and also inject the sidecar to all
pods in that namespace.
Then identical deployments for version v1
and v2.
The same service, just a different name.
Same destination rule that defines two subsets
for both versions.
Now the virtual service must have the external
DNS name under the hosts.
In my case, I have app.devopsbyexample.com
and the second one for internal Kubernetes
routing.
In this case, we have an additional attribute
gateway that uses the name of the gateway
that we're going to create next.
Similar to the previous example, we'll route
90% of the traffic to v1 and 10% to v2.
You can also use different prefixes if multiple
services hide under your api, similar to a
typical ingress.
To expose the application to the internet,
we need to create a gateway object.
This is an istio custom resource and not a
gateway api from Kubernetes.
Keep this in mind; they are very similar on
purpose.
On line 9 selector uses pods labels to identify
what gateway to use.
To route plain http traffic, you select port
80 and http protocol.
As a host, you put your dns name.
You can use the same gateway to route multiple
domains just list them here.
Let's check the pod labels on the ingress
gateway to make sure that it will match our
label under the selector.
Istio gateway looks like it should work.
Let's go ahead and apply the example-3 folder.
Check the status of pods.
I want to show you a trick that you can use
to verify Ingress before you update DNS.
Hostname is just a header.
You can use curl and pretend that you already
have a proper dns.
For the address, you specify the load balancer
hostname.
Alright, it works; we got a response from
the app deployed in Kubernetes.
Now let's create a CNAME record for our domain.
I use google domains, but it does not matter.
Just create a CNAME if it points to another
hostname or A record if you need to point
to the IP address.
In a few minutes, check if the DNS is updated.
Finally, we can use our custom domain name
to reach the app.
That was pretty simple.
The next step is to secure our application
with a TLS certificate.
First of all, we need to deploy a cert-manager,
including all custom resources that come with
it.
In some environments like GCP, you would also
need to create an additional firewall rule.
In aws, it should work out of the box.
Let's apply it.
To automatically obtain TLS certificates from
letsencrypt, we need to create a cluster issuer.
You can also create just Issuer, which is
namespace specific.
When you are just getting started with cert-manager,
you should use a staging environment.
It's almost identical to production, just
different URLs.
Also, you must specify what ingress class
will be used to solve the http01 challenge.
That's why we had to override some defaults
when we deployed istiod.
When you test and be able to obtain a certificate,
you can switch to the production Issuer.
They have a strict quota for certificates.
Let's apply both staging and production cluster
issuers.
Check if both of them are ready before creating
certificates.
To automatically get certificates on a typical
ingress, you would use annotation.
At this time, it's not supported on the istio
Ingress, but it works on gateway api.
As a workaround, we can create certificate
resources separately.
Use your domain name.
To test certificates, update the name to staging
issuer.
Also, it must be created in the istio-ingress
namespace, where you have your gateway pods.
When you create these certificates, the cert-manager
will obtain a certificate from let's encrypt
and store it in Kubernetes secret.
The certificate is valid only for 90 days,
and the cert-manager will automatically renew
it and update the secret.
If you get the certificate immediately, you
can see it's not ready.
In case it is stuck in not ready state, you
can describe that certificate and find that
the certificate request was created.
Then you can describe the certificate request.
You can see that order was created.
Let's describe it as well.
Then the challenge was created.
Describe the challenge.
In my case certificate was issued, and the
challenge was deleted already.
If you get a certificate, it should be in
a ready state by now.
Check that the Kubernetes secret was also
Now to secure the api, you can add another
rule for port 443 and use the https protocol.
You also must specify the secret name that
was created by the certificate resource and
a host.
Let's apply it again to update the gateway.
To check the certificate, you can use the
openssl tool.
This is your certificate.
You can try to access your api from the browser.
It looks like it works.
The certificate is valid and issued from letsencrypt.
In the following section, we'll use prometheus
and grafana to monitor istio and applications.
I'm not going to spend a lot of time on deploying
all monitoring components; you can watch the
previous video for that.
First, we need to create prometheus operator
Then deploy the prometheus operator itself.
Prometheus.
And grafana.
You can use either create or server-side to
apply custom resources.
Then create a monitoring namespace.
Deploy Prometheus operator.
And finally, grafana.
In the monitoring namespace, you should have
two pods.
And a single pod for grafana.
To monitor istio, we need to create a podmonitor
and use istio sidecar labels.
For example, let's get one of the pods that
we want to monitor.
First of all, to create a podmonitor Prometheus
object, we need a named port, in this case,
http-envoy-prom.
In the second part, we need to select those
pods based on the label, such as istio monitoring.
Based on these two pieces, we can start monitoring
the istio service mesh.
You need to specify the namespace where your
applications are deployed, staging, and production,
as an example.
Then use the selector and the port name.
On line 8 prometheus main label must match
the one on the Prometheus resource.
Let's go ahead and apply it.
Since I don't have Ingress for prometheus,
I'll use port forward to access Prometheus
UI.
In a few seconds, maybe up to a minute, you'll
see that the prometheus operator converted
podmonitor object to the native prometheus
config and reloaded the server.
Under targets, you should have a new target
with a few pods.
The next step is optional.
I just want to show you how to use a service
monitor instead of a pod monitor.
For example, to monitor the ingress gateway.
Let's get the pod in yaml format.
For example, you have a port, but the name
is missing, and you cannot add it for some
reason.
In this case, you cannot use podmonitor since
you need a named port.
Instead, you can create a service and a service
monitor to target this port.
Let's define a new Kubernetes service that
only uses prometheus port and give it a name
metrics.
Now we can create a service monitor and use
that endpoint and metrics port name.
It's a useful workaround when you don't have
a port name and are not able to add it but
still want to monitor the application with
prometheus.
Let's apply both service and service monitor.
If you refresh the prometheus UI, you should
get a new target with the gateway.
There are a lot of metrics exposed by istio
sidecars, but we'll focus on requests metrics.
Since we used podmonitor for internal metrics
and service monitor for the gateway, you can
use a job label to filter them out.
I'll use port-forward as well to access the
grafana dashboard.
If you used my code to deploy grafana, the
username is admin, and the password is devops123.
I prepared a dashboard to monitor Ingress
and mesh inside Kubernetes.
You can copy json and import it to the grafana.
Now let's simulate some traffic.
On the top graph, you can find latency measured
in percentiles.
The second one is traffic in requests per
second, and the bottom one is the ratio between
successful and failed requests.
Let's generate some failed requests by sending
requests to the not supported path.
In the graph, you can see that availability
drops below 80%.
For the second test, to monitor the service
mesh inside the Kubernetes, ssh to the pod
and run another script.
In the next section, we'll deploy kiali to
visualize the service topology inside Kubernetes.
You can also deploy it using helm or yaml
files.
You just need to watch out for external services,
especially you need to provide a valid prometheus
URL.
The topology graph is built based on prometheus
Let's apply.
And verify that kiali is up.
You may see some errors that you need to fix
by updating the config, but the main functionality
is based on prometheus.
It still should work.
Since some of the requests are sent to the
wrong URL, you can see red lines that represent
failed requests.
In a large microservice deployment, it is
useful to find out what service is failing
quickly.
If we stop our script, in a couple of minutes,
you should see that the service is recovered.
We have the gateway, internal service, and
different versions of our application.
You can use UI to monitor traffic distribution
when you perform canary deployments.
Istio has become the de facto service mesh
for modern microservices.
With its advanced networking, security, and
observability features, Istio provides a unified
platform to connect, manage, and secure your
If you're building cloud-native applications,
Istio is a must-have tool in your toolkit.
If you want to use Istio in production in
the next couple of months, you should use
istio custom resources such as destination
rules, virtual services, and others.
Istio also has betta support for Gateway API
to use as Ingress.
But keep in mind that it won't work with the
virtual service.
Also, istio has experimental support to use
Gateway API in a service mesh.
I have two other tutorials on how to implement
both.
Thank you for watching, and I'll see you in
the next video.

## 영상 3: [ Kube 57 ] Istio demo with Kiali and traffic management (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0w23AQ-hrF4)

how are you to rivers welcome to this
video
I'm Venkat and this is just me an open
source channel right in this video I
want to show you a quick sto demo I'm
saying quick demo but I'm not sure how
long it's gonna take but few viewers
asked me about this particular video so
I'm doing this I've done a series of
videos around each do topic so I think
it was like six videos we covered the
steel installation in your kubernetes
cluster and then how to deploy the
sample booking for application and then
adding the graph on visualization
Chiarelli visualization and couple
videos around traffic management alright
so viewers asked me some of them asked
me instead of going with the sample
booking for application why don't we
just show us a sample application
created by yourself so that's what I'm
gonna do in this video so I've got some
sample application that I've written
myself I haven't completely returned the
application I'm just using the nginx
container with some custom code in it
that's it I've got few slides here my
custom notes the usual way of me
explaining things alright so what I'm
gonna do in this video is to deploy two
microservice alright so the first micro
service is called my web I've got one
version of it version one of my web
micro service and I've got another micro
service B which is called my data
alright so I've got two versions of this
micro service version 1 and version 2 so
how and what I'm actually doing in these
micro service and how these micro
services are integrated and how I'm
going to use the e steel to manage the
routing and how I do the traffic
management between these micro services
so that's what we're gonna see in this
video let's go to the next one
alright so my web micro service and my
data micro service so my web micro
service it's just a simple nginx
container nothing fancy so I didn't want
to
my own application and published dr.
docker hub and then pulled that from
docker so I'm using the readily
available public nginx container nginx
image and what i'm doing here is i'm
using a config map for the default nginx
configuration so when i deploy this part
i mounted this config map into the pod
under this part EDC nginx constabie
slash default comms that's the default
configuration and for my data micro
service i've got again the same nginx
container I'm using config map for the
index dot HTML so that's the actual web
page so instead of baking that web page
inside the container I'm using a config
map to inject that index.html file under
user share nginx HTML index dot HTML so
I've got two versions of the my data
micro service so these two versions
differ with this index or HTML so you
will see just just to show you some
difference between these two versions
I've created two index dot HTML maybe
with a different background so how these
microservices are related how am I going
to call micro-service be from
microservice eh all right so when you
hit the my web micro service it is going
to the index configuration that I've
deployed as a conflict map is going to
redirect you to HTTP : my data which is
this service so basically you are
accessing the my web micro service which
is in turn accessing the my data web
service so that's the link between micro
service a and micro service B all right
so let's look at what are the components
involved in doing this bit all right so
my web is just a single version I've got
only one version version one and we've
got the part the actual nginx part and
we also have the sidecar container so
when you deploy it along with each do
you get the sidecar container so that's
the NY proxy so all the communication it
won't
directly to the part as you have seen in
all my previous history or videos you
know that the sidecar is a proxy so all
the traffic coming into the pod will go
through the the sidecar proxy so you
don't have to change any of your
application code even with your existing
application you can make use of the sto
service mesh so all the configurations
and all the routing logic are done in
the proxies not on your application
itself so that's very useful so I don't
have to change a bit of code in your
actual application so all is done on the
sidecar itself right so my web contains
a part and a sidecar when you deploy
that and from my data micro web service
I've got two versions again part sidecar
Paul and sidecar so that is a deployment
this is another deployment for version
one and I've got a deployment for my web
all right and I'm exposing a service I'm
exposing this deployment my web
deployment as a service so this one is a
cluster IP it's not a node port it's not
a load balancer or anything so it's just
a plain simple cluster IP so still this
service won't be accessible outside the
cluster because it's a cluster IP
service and again I'm exposing this
deployment my data deployment both
version 1 and version 2 using this
service here that's again a cluster IP
service all right so that's the
architecture in addition to normal
resources that you deploy so you already
know about the deployment and if you
want access your deployment you need to
expose it as a service and in addition
when it comes to STM we need couple more
components so one is the gateway so we
need to create a gateway service which
is a custom resource definition when you
install ISTE oh so that's one of the
custom resource definition that gets
deployed and all the traffic coming in
to your cluster is through this gateway
all the traffic going in going out of
the cluster is through the Gateway and
you
also have a component called virtual
service a resource or object called
virtual service and virtual service is
the resource or object that defines the
routing basically when a request comes
to a particular domain so where it needs
to be rerouted so in my case I'm saying
my web dot example.com so if a request
comes in from my web tour example.com
through gateway and I've got the routing
logic here and I've set the destination
so that it needs to go so when it comes
to my web tour example.com the request
should be routed to this service so
that's it this is the service from my
web and when you hit the service when we
go to my web dot example.com and it
knows to wrote the traffic the request
to this service and when I hit here the
part the index configuration proxies my
request to this service and this service
load balances between version 1 and
version 2 of the my data micro service
right I hope it's all clear now let's go
to the practical part so we have covered
all the boring theory stuff let's go to
the exciting practical stuff what I'm
gonna close that one let me open web
browser
I'm also gonna open my terminal here let
me open another terminal alright okay so
I've got cuban areas already provision
so in order to follow this video
basically what you need is a cuban a dis
cluster and helm installed and then
metal lb load balancing so that is very
important so you need to have cuban at
this cluster helm and metal lb I've done
videos on all these alright cube serial
version - - shot I'm on version 1.15 dot
3 so that's there helm version - - shot
I'm using version 2.14 and I'm also
having metal lb installed ok the first
thing is let's go ahead and install sta
alright so this is gonna be the same
step that I follow
in all my sto related videos so you
might be knowing all the commands by now
and I'm gonna install this deal with the
key ally add-on so key alias for
visualizing your traffic flow it's very
useful to detect any problems with your
service visually all right so sto
install sto setup now we go down here
the first command S Curl get latest is
do is tear version its 1.3 dot - at the
time of this recording the latest
version is 1.3 don't - but when you
watch this video in the future go to the
spare G steel set up and then check for
the latest version all right so Carl let
me go to my Play directory which is
where I do all my stuff go I've got the
command in my history let's do that so
it's downloading sto it's going download
the East year and it will have all the
sample files as well so city to sto sto
and then you have the bin directory here
so it's do-si-do that's the command you
need to move that command sudo move bin
is toc TL to you sir local bin I've
already done that which is toc-toc it's
an user local bin is toc TL all right so
now we are good to install sto the first
command is so make sure you are in the
sto directory that you downloaded he'll
install in the install directory
kubernetes helm this deal in it - - name
is tio in it - - name space sto system
alright watch
let's see what resources has been
deployed cube cereal get all nope I need
to look in the steel system namespace
sto system get oh all right so
containers getting created basically
it's it has created like three jobs and
the jobs will get executed on these
parts so it will set up or it will
create all the customers those
definitions alright so that's all done
so now we are going to install the
actual list here along with the key ally
add-on so to install key ally are to use
key ally with is do you need to create a
secret containing your username and
password which will be used when you
login to the key ally web interface so
for that go ahead and search for a steel
key ally sto clearly visualizing your
mesh and it will have instructions on
how to install so basically you are
creating a couple of variables clearly
username key ally passphrase and you're
setting that up if you're using bash use
these two commands and if you're using
seashell like me go ahead and use these
two all right so clearly user name I'm
gonna use admin key only phosphorus I'm
gonna use phosphorus admin same admin
alright so that's done namespace is a
steal
alright that's done cube serial create
namespace we don't have to create
namespace we have already created the
east EO system namespace and now we are
good to run this command here all right
copy that and paste it all right so
that's our key ally secret that that got
created so now we are good install key
ally sorry
helm sorry sto have an installed install
in the Cuban artists directory helm sto
- - name is tio - - namespace we are
again going to install that in the same
namespace which is sto system
- - set clearly enabled equals true all
right let's look at what resources are
being deployed watch - X cube CDL - M
sto system get parts ok as you can see
there are lots of parts deployments
replica sets demon sets getting created
so Citadel gali ingress gateway sidecar
telemetry Prometheus and you can also
see clearly here so it will take about a
minute for all the parts to be ready and
running so let's wait for that right
let's wait for it and we've got few more
to be completed running and let's wait
for Prometheus alright so I think
everything is now ready okay so alright
I think our sto is completely ready and
one more thing we shouldn't forget to do
we need to label the namespace cube CDL
label namespace default is tio injection
equals enabled so unless you do that
these to your site car on get deployed
along with your part then you have to
install or you have to inject the
sidecar manually space cube city all get
namespace show labels
alright so default namespace as Tata
Steel injection enabled so one of our
associate apply or one of our deployment
you put in the default namespace we'll
get the history of sidecar so now I'm
going to go to my play directly and I'm
going to get clone my kubernetes
repository I've got all the llamo files
already created for you so let's go
ahead and get clone git clone has two
TPS giddyup comm just mean open source
kubernetes
alright city took kubernetes city to
Yama's city to steal
demo cool so here's where all my
services are so in my notes I showed you
what micro services are got so I've got
my
so that's one microservice and I've got
two versions of my data microservice my
data version 1 my data version 2 and
I've got a virtual service and at
Gateway if you remember my notes I
shared just a while ago you will
remember that's one micro service these
two are another micro service and in
order to access we need a gateway and we
also need a virtual service all right
ok so let's login to our Keala dashboard
because it'll be easy for us to see how
traffic is flowing between different
micro services visually for that cube
cereal - Yin HDL system get service or
get parts get service ok get service I
think it's key ally yeah so as you can
see clearly service is exposed but it's
only exposed to as a cluster IP so we
won't be able to access it outside of
the cluster what you can do is you can
edit this key ally service and then
change that to Northport so that he can
access it from outside the cluster or
the other way is you can use port
forwarding so it's exposed on port 20001
so what we can do is cube CDL - in sto
system for forward the key ally port and
the port that we are going to forward is
20,000 1 to 20,000 1 or on our localhost
let me put an ampersand so it goes in
the background ok so now if I go to
localhost colon 20,000 we will get our
key ally dashboard cool so if you are
using that if you're launching that for
the first time then you will be greeted
with this login screen admin admin so
those are the credentials that we
created when we deployed Istria all
right
log in and you will see default
namespace is tears instead metal and B
at the moment in the D for
space we don't have any applications
deployed all right so let's go ahead and
deploy some applications and before that
I'm gonna show you what each of these
llamo files look like so first let's
take a look at my web demo file
all right so VI my web dot yeah mo and
you can see here I talked about the
config map so I'm using this config map
and the configuration is proxy pass has
TTP my data location is slash so that's
the root URL so any requests coming to
this index web server will be proxied to
http my data so that's my micro service
B so that's how my Microsoft is a and
Microsoft is B are interconnected so
when you hit the root URL of the my web
micro service it will be proxied to
hosta t be my date at the second micro
service so that's the config map I'll
show you where the config map how I'm
mounting this config map inside the pod
so next time creating a service the
service is exposed on port 80 so that's
for my web micro service looks just a
simple service definition and here comes
the deployment I'm using the normal
nginx deployment with one replicas and
if I scroll down so you can see here
volumes I'm using a config map as a
volume so the config map that I defined
is nginx conflict if I go all the way up
our the name of the config map is engine
X config and that's what I'm using the
config map and volume mounts inside the
container
I'm volume mounting it and the mount
part is EDC nginx contour D so when this
part comes up this engine x.com nginx
config config map will get mounted under
a TC nginx contour D slash default conf
that's because the data key is default
conf
all right so that's the my web micro
service a
and if you look at my data version one
me hi my data we want on Yama so that's
my second micro-service version one of
my second micro-service and if you look
here again it's a config map and it's
the index dot HTML it's just a plain
simple index dot HTML nothing fancy it
will show just a text saying just me an
open source I'm version 1 with a font
color of yellow with the background
color of green so that's my Gaussian one
and I've got these service exposed again
it's a cluster IP service for my data
micro service and now comes the
deployment and the deployment is very
similar to the other micro service I'm
using the default nginx container here
and the volume is from the config map
and I'm mounting it under user share
nginx HTML so that's the default
document root for nginx so anything you
put under user share and in XHTML index
to an STM index dot PHP index dot HTML
so that will be your default web page
all right so I don't have to go through
this my devotion to it's again same
maybe I should show you my data be to
dot your MOU and again everything is
going to be the same and you don't have
to define the service here because
there's only one service for the whole
my data deployment version 1 and version
2 so no service definition here just the
config map and the deployment and in the
config map you see a slight difference
in stuff background color green just to
show you some difference I've changed
the background color to gray that's it
and there is no phone color the default
black phone color will be used all right
so now comes the interesting bit virtual
service and Gateway dot yeah let's look
at gateway first VI
gateway dot llamo it's that simple
that's it
so it says host is my web tour
example.com so access to my web girl
example.com
is allowed into the cluster and the
selectors sto we want to use the east
ingress gateway if you've got an engine
X ingress controller or traffic ingress
controller installed on your system on
your Cuba Redis cluster we want to use
the stos ingress gateway that's what we
are using here selectors ingress gateway
steals in gross gateway servers and this
gateway will be listening on port 80 so
when a request comes to my web that
on port 80 it will be allowed in
so that's gateway we need to have that
increased gateway now let's look at the
virtual service virtual service Don Yama
again it says the gateway so we need to
bind this virtual service with the
gateway that we created previously so we
are saying the gateway is going to be my
web gateway host is my web dot
example.com so when a request comes to
my web dot example.com
it's already let in by the gateways and
now we need to decide where we are going
to send the request to so what is going
to be our back-end service so when a
request comes to my web tour example.com
the default destination will be my bed
so my web is the service that be exposed
VI my web yummo so the service here my
web service so that's the one it will
get all the traffic whenever you hit my
web that example.com all right cool
let's take a look at cube city I'll get
all all right so the normal we don't
have anything let's deploy all these
resources cube City I'll create minus F
dot enter so so all these have been
created and on the bottom you can see
two containers on each of the pod so one
does the nginx container the other one
is the actual sidecar on why sidecar and
we have the my data service my web
service deployments and replica sets
part is initializing and it's running
let's wait for all these okay we've got
everything up and run
and in here on the key le - body can see
two applications and now two
applications are healthy okay let's
close that we don't need that anymore
and what we can do now is let's take a
look at this one and I've showed you
I've explained you about the key early
web interfaces so I don't think I need
to go through that again
so let's go to the graph our
applications our workload services or
Institute config you can also click here
which will take you to all these things
okay so let's go back and click on the
go to graph alright so now we have this
graph right let's okay no problem
requests percentage version app graph
you can look at various ways so that's
the app graph and that's the service
graph version app graph and we have the
workload graph Russian aircraft that
that will show you the actual that will
show you in detail request percentage
display everything is looking good
alright so since we haven't accessed our
endpoint yet we don't see any traffic
here okay let's take a look at how to
access our own application so the
application is completely exposed now we
can hit the URL my web tour example comm
so how how does it know when you do my
web for example.com to take you to the
service cube CDL - n sto system get
service sto ingress gateway and the load
balancer is 1 7 to 17 let's copy that so
that's the IP address of my load
balancer so that's your entry point
right sudo VI EDC host and put in here
the IP address of your load balancer and
then to my web dot example.com okay so
now we should be able to access my web
dot example.com my web dot example.com
and there you go so that's version one
and if I hit refresh
that's version 2 version 1 version 2
version 1 version 2 everything is
looking fine let's go back to the Keala
consult and we should be able to see the
traffic flow in okay so what I actually
will do is basically I will do a curl
request to send the request periodically
or while true do curl - yes as you can
see here on the left we now see how the
parts are the microservices are
interrelated so one crew do curl I'm not
interested about the output just send
some requests to my Weber example.com
sleep for once again done ok so now we
are sending the request so shortly you
should be able to see here the traffic
flows let's uncheck the unused node so
that the kubernetes thing goes away
alright so now you should be able to see
the traffic flow here ok I think that's
your ingress gateway and the requests
are coming to my web and my web is
proxying the requests to my data and now
we've got both version 1 and version 2
so 50% of the traffic goes to version 1
50% of the traffic goes to version 2 all
right so how to change the traffic
policy let's say we want to send 100
percent of the traffic to be 1 and 0
percent to be 2 something like that so
for that what you got to do is click on
this one here and click on the service
my data and now I here you don't have
any virtual service or destination rules
let's create something action here you
can create a weighted routing create
matching routing suspect traffic and so
on let's do a create wait order of thing
so the moment it's 50% for version 1 and
version 2 let's change that
version 1 so version one will receive
hundred percent of the traffic and
version 2 will receive zero percent of
the traffic let's create that so now you
can see there is one virtual service and
destination rule let's take on that one
destination row you can see version 1
and version 2 ok now if I go back to the
graph and change that to versioned app
graph hide that and now you should be
able to see that the traffic will
increase to be 1 and then decrease to
read to eventually 100% of the traffic
will go to v1 and 0% to veto as you can
see here 70% to be 120 % to version 2 so
now we can see 100% traffic going to
version 1 and v2 doesn't have any
traffic against look at the color of the
the edge here so it's gray it's green
here alright so similarly you can do
whatever you want click on the my data
service action if you want update
waiting role you can update that can
change that 100% or let's say my version
1 will take like 80 or 90% and version 2
you have just introduced your version 2
of the microservice and you want just
10% of the traffic to go to version 2
just in case if you want to do some
testing so update Shawn graph hide and
look at the version graph hide that and
we should be able to see like 90% of the
traffic going to be one and some of the
traffic will start to flow to version 2
as well so this is a weight based
routing he can also do match based
routing alright and now I just want to
show you some other things so we have
done that in the key ally web interface
right so it would have created a virtual
service for that cube city I'll get
virtual service so we've only created
one virtual service my web
yes so but now we can see there is my
data virtual service which God created
automatically because we did that from
the key Holly web interface you can see
a 97 percent and 2 percent going to I
don't know why but we've said 90 percent
of e1 and 10% to v2 okay don't worry
about that cube city I'll get virtual
service my data - OH
yamo point that - less you can see here
how the Yama file is defined so has to
DP route destination is my data and
subset is V 1 so that is version 1
subset is V 2 which is version 2 so it
says that's the virtual service so
whenever we hit the my data service
which is this one my data and the
traffic needs to be split between these
two destinations version 1 and version 2
wait is 90% - version 1 and 10% -
version 2 so that's weight based routing
ok
let's also look at a match based routing
okay so for that just go to my data
click on my data and I'm going to delete
all the traffic routing delete that go
to show on graph so now you will be able
to see that since we've deleted the
routing the traffic will flow evenly
between version 1 and version 2 we don't
have any virtual service cube City I'll
get virtual service yes that my data
virtual service is gone we only have the
mindmap virtual service so the traffic
will again get split equally so 7525 and
eventually we'll see 50% 50% traffic we
just deleted the rule that we just
created
alright so in order to create match
based routing let's click on that again
my data servers I'm gonna create a
matching routing so here what I'm saying
is you've got a few options headers URI
scheme method
tyranny so when I say hitter you sir is
Venkat and it's not gonna work because
I'm not posting the header my
application the web application is not
designed to include that header it's not
looking for that hitter but this is just
to show you if you've got a header field
that says user and if you're looking for
a banker in add match and I'm going to
redirect them to version 1 and this is
just a rule that matches this header so
if a header matches this particular
value the header name is user and the
Hinderer value is when cat in the
traffic will be routed to my data
version 1 of the application so we also
need to add the default rule add another
rule so here it says match any request
and I'm going to add v2 and delete v1
okay and roll so in this case now you
can see here if the header of the
incoming request contains user and spent
cat in then it will be routed to version
1 of the my data microservice all other
requests will get routed to version 2 of
the my data micro-service let's create
that show on graph change that to
version ab graph hide that ok so now let
me go to my web for example.com so I'm
not passing any hitter so by default
every time i refresh it will still show
me version 2 of the app because only if
the header contains user has been cat M
it will show me version 1 because I'm
not doing that all my requests will be
routed to version 2 I won't be able to
see version 1 at all so now we can see
all the data a hundred percent of my
traffic is going to be - because of that
rule let me also show that rule in the
command line cube CTL get virtual
service so my data virtual services
there
cube city I'll get virtual servers my
data and so llamo ness so now you can
see here the same virtual service so
this one is for the host my data so
which is here so whenever a traffic or a
connection comes to my data our
destination rules are the first one has
matched the header if they use the name
field in the hinder matches when cut in
route to the destination version 1 and
we also have the second destination and
for all others so basically it will be
evaluated in the ordered all the rules
here in any virtual service will be
evaluated in a sequential order
so the first request comes in it checks
whether the header contains the user
event @n if it contains that the traffic
will be routed to the version 1 of my my
data micro service if it doesn't contain
user venkat n or if it contains any
other user but if what it goes to the
next role which will be routed to
version 2 of my my data micro service
all right cool so that's all I wanted to
show in this video hopefully it might
have answered some of your questions so
this is to show you that how you can use
your existing applications and you can
make use of the histiocytes mesh
capability to do traffic management
routing policies and so on thank you for
watching I'll see you all in my next
video bye bye
