Kind: captions
Language: en-US
Hey, everyone today,
I want to talk to you about a very exciting topic of image caching container,
image caching to be specific.
It's exciting. I promise. No.
But really if you're running any sort of production Kubernetes workloads,
you want to have control of your image repository.
That's where you're pulling all your images from
the registry you have is yours and up time
is something you need in order to make sure that you can scale your clusters out.
If you want to move those repositories closer to
your accounts where you're pulling them from in regions,
say
uh that's going to be something that you're gonna have to do.
And if you're relying on upstream third party repositories and registries,
you don't control those.
And in some cases like the
k8s registry, which is a fantastic service.
It is a free service that's run by community members and
there is no S L A for up time on it.
If it goes down, you can't scale, you can't build images if you're relying on it. So
I want to talk to you about image cache
and what we have is called a pull through cash. Uh You can do cashing and
mirroring in a lot of different ways. E C R just announced a new feature for
using the upstream Coon
registry as a pull through cash for E C R. I wanna show you how it works.
I want to show you how you can use it and a few different ideas on something you
might be working on just to make sure that
you can scale your clusters and their performance.
So I wrote this blog post.
It has all of the examples that we initially thought that people would like
to have depending on how you're using your images.
I'm gonna walk through just a couple of them in
this video to show you how it can be used.
And the first thing we need to do is just turn it on.
So let's look over here in our in my registry.
You see, I have no repos, no images available right now.
I'm gonna click on the private registry right here and then pull through cash.
We have to add a rule for where we're pulling from.
And so the public registry we're gonna pull from is Kubernetes.
There's also E C R public in
those have been there for a little while now and
we have a default name space here of Kate's.
I'm gonna go ahead and leave that, but you can change it to whatever you want.
Once we say that you can see here that what all of
my images are gonna have this Kates slash upstream image name.
So I have a registry which is my URL. It's account name
in my region, all of that stuff. I have
a Kates
and then a slash image.
And let's say I'm pulling the uh auto scale the cluster auto scalar.
That's gonna be a slash cluster dash, auto scaler colon. And then the tag,
I'm just gonna pen that to the end of whatever my registry and Kate's name space is.
So let's show you how we make the first image and pull it from an upstream repository.
Uh First, we need to log in,
of course. So we're gonna log into my E C R registry
and you can see here this is the URL for the registry itself.
And then we just need to pull an image. Let's say I'm gonna pull the metric server
and I'm gonna pull the 0.63 version and this is just a standard Docker poll.
Here is my registry URL. Here's that Kate's name space.
And then here's the piece that usually would be after registry dot K dot I O
So I don't have that image existing.
But when I pull that, I'm gonna tell E C R and say, hey, I need this image.
It's going to go upstream and fetch that image for me.
Pull it down to E C R and then serve it back to me.
And you can see here if I switch back over to
my registry. I will have a repo now
that has that metric server available in it.
And something important to note here, I only pulled the 063 tag.
So that's only, that's the only tag that's in here.
It's whatever layers are required for that 063 tag.
So nothing else gets pulled in with that. I'm not getting the entire
uh image with all of the tags. I'm just pulling the one that I need.
I'm mirroring it here or,
or cashing it here in E C R and now it's available for me to use.
So let's go ahead and use it. I have a Kubernetes cluster.
You can see I have nothing installed.
Let's go ahead and install that metric server using the helm charts.
So the metric server has a default helm charts.
And what we need to do is we need to set a variable to say, hey,
we're gonna use this chart but I want you to
come from the registry that I'm gonna provide to you
upgrade
and here in
my cache,
uh we can see here,
I'm setting this image image dot repository variable
to the place that I'm storing it now.
And this is in us West one where I pulled it down from and we will say create name space
that's gonna go ahead and deploy that helm chart and it,
it just overwrites that variable at deploy time and says, OK,
you need the image to come from somewhere else.
And as we would expect that's gonna pull down and get it from my registry.
Now,
let's say I have a different cluster in another region and
I want this image to be available in that region too.
And I don't want to pull from, let's say Oregon us West two from us west one.
The cool thing about having this in E C R is there's a feature for that already.
So if I look at this private registry,
I can go to replication.
Replication has rules that we can add on what we want to replicate. Where
so I'm in us West one,
I'm going to say I want cross region replication from this region.
And so I'm going to replicate to other regions from here.
So any time I pull an image,
it'll be pulled down here and then replicated to the other regions,
I could also go to other accounts,
but I actually don't need that here because I can set up.
I am permissions to pull from my centralized accounts in
those regions once it's available in the region already.
So all I'm gonna do is do cross
a cross region replication.
Click next and I'm gonna replicate this to
us West two in Oregon, I can click as many of these as I want standard rates,
apply for storage in those regions and then a
filter for what is going to be replicated.
In this case, it's everything in my Kate's name space. So this is a filter for
anything that gets any repository that gets added in this region under
that Kate's name space is automatically gonna be replicated somewhere else.
We can also see here the Jason for how this works.
If I want to do this through the A W C I or terraform or something,
it's a prefix match on Kates.
We submit that rule.
And the thing to note here is if I go over to the Oregon region,
go back into E C R
and we will see that I actually don't have any images there.
I don't have images because oh actually, I have old images.
These were from a previous recording of this
and uh pay no attention to it because this is
actually the third time I'm recording this for various reasons.
So let's get rid of all of those. And now we have nothing.
And so replication only happens when I pull the image.
And so in order to do that,
I'm gonna go back into my terminal and let's pull a different
tag here just to show that we're gonna pull the same tag.
I'm still in West one. That's where I'm authenticated is to West one
and this image or this new tag is gonna be pulled through West one.
It's gonna get the tag and store it in that
region and then it's going to replicate it to my other
regions that I defined And so if I just wait
a second for it to actually do that replication process,
it's not instant. It does have to send some bits over the wire
and it's a lot faster than a plane ride though. I'll tell you that much.
And so here we go, we have the metric server.
If I click on it here, I will have the, once the tags and everything finishes,
I will have that 062 image tag here.
So now I can pull this image in the Oregon region.
And if I have a cluster there,
I didn't have to wait for myself to pull it in that region either.
Now, if I'm replicating this across a lot of different regions,
one thing that I hate doing is trying to remember what region I'm even deploying to.
And so in order to
fix that problem,
we can actually go into the cluster and set up a policy
that will rewrite our image destination or pole for us automatically.
So let's look at
uh
Verno which is actually called out in the blog post. I have a whole example for it.
Shout out to Jimmy on my team for helping me with that policy. Uh That was awesome.
And so if we install Caver
in the cluster, which I already have,
and then here's an example policy that we can look at
open up this policy.
And this is gonna show us everything that we're going to look for,
we're looking for this key here under uh registry
I
O
and we're gonna rewrite that to my registry with
a slash cases as the name space and everything else is just gonna prepend at the end.
So everything after
uh that registry name is going to come here under image container element path
and also the tag.
And so we can see here this is for um containers, but I'm also gonna do it for
further down here and it containers, you could do it for sidecar containers.
Anything you want to rewrite with that new U R URL,
you're going to put here in this policy and we're gonna apply that to the cluster.
I actually already have
Verno in this cluster. So all I need to do is apply that
and now that it's applied,
I can go ahead and pull another image and see how it gets rewritten.
But in this phase, I actually still need to prepopulate my cache.
And so let's switch my region back over to Northern California
and let's pull uh the busy box image.
I know the case registry has a busy box image at the
roots and I'm just gonna pull the latest image just so that,
that gets cashed in my repo
back in Northern California. Refresh this, I see my busy box image.
And now let's deploy a pod.
I have this pod definition here and I'm explicitly leaving
this as registry Kate dot I O with busy box.
And so we can see how that gets rewritten when we apply it.
And then once we describe that pod,
we can see that we're pulling uh something that's not registry dot K dot I O.
This is of course our registry Verna went ahead and rewrote
that image for us and then applied it in this region.
So each region you have a cluster,
you can have different policies that automatically do this for you.
So you can rewrite those image policies for you automatically.
And the last thing that I really like to do is again,
I don't like to think about even what images I have cashed or don't have cashed.
So in this case, I'm going to set up A I M permission to allow my Cooper
Ty's worker nodes to pull any image from upstream.
This is gonna work in with I AM permissions that it needs a create repo policy.
So I currently cannot pull any image I want unless I
prepopulate it because the nodes when they try to make a pull
through cache actually need to do an I M create repo policy
or or call to be able to initially create the repo.
In this case, you don't really want to do that in production.
So I'm gonna do this for a test cluster where I typically test out images.
So anytime I need to update an image tag or pull down new things to try them,
I'm gonna do that here in my test,
my test cluster and then that gets replicated across multiple regions.
And the production accounts don't actually need uh the nodes
in those production accounts don't need the create rebo policy.
They're fine with read only.
And my cluster that I do my testing in a DEV or test
environment has that access to do this sort of poll and create repos.
So in order to do that,
I'm gonna jump over to EC2 and I just need to
find the I M permissions that my nodes are running with.
So if I look under instances
I have a P T C
uh node here uh for both through cash,
let's go down and find the I M uh role that it's using
oops too far
subnet. I am roll there we go.
Let's open this up.
And then in the blog post, I have of course, an example of what you would need.
Um This is an example. I am for pulling images across multiple accounts,
but I have here it is
I am policy right here for uh the ability to
pull down new images basically through a pull through cache.
So go here and we're going to add a permission
and create it in line
and drop the Jason
create repo
great policy.
And now my nodes have permission to pull new
images through that cache which create that image.
So let's go ahead and deploy the node problem detector.
Uh this is a fun one from upstream. I know those images are stored in the upstream
uh registry. There's a helm installed somewhere in here that I need to find.
There we go.
I just need this.
And in this case, I'm gonna run this helm install without overriding any of the image
uh names. Because I have that
Verno policy that's automatically going to rewrite that registry dot K
dot I O to my local registry in this region.
Once that's created,
it's going to then trigger it in the pull through cache
and let's just jump real quick back into here. I'll go back to E C R and show you again.
I don't have this image available in my repos. I just got Busy box and metric server.
But if we do this helm install, I will get that demon set that goes out
and now I have oh my busy bo oh It's failing
because I told it to sleep for a couple of seconds.
Uh So if I look at this image
or this pod here,
you will see that we are assigning it
and here is our container image.
Uh And it's, it's present on this machine because I did pull it.
But if I go back here,
oh, my image po policy has been set.
Um Let's delete a note
that's always the fun part.
So in this case, uh we can see that I actually didn't trigger
the Poultry cache
because
it says it's already present and I don't have a policy to always pull that image.
So the only way I can do that is either change the helm chart and say, hey,
I want you to always pull this image or uh delete a note or, or clear the cache
on a note so that that image gets removed and that does happen on occasion.
Uh There's a, a basically a
that cleans up some of those old images.
Uh but I didn't wait long enough between recordings to trigger that.
So let's force it to trigger
and
we gotta wait for both my notes to get available.
I already have the Damon set deployed.
And so this is just a matter of as soon as the node comes up,
the Damon set will automatically go to that node
and that will trigger the pull of that image.
And it looks like I have a new image. Now it's been available for 17 seconds.
Let's look for which pod is uh 22 seconds old here.
And although I don't have my network ready on this note yet,
you can see that it pulling it, pulled this image finally for us.
So when I go back into E C R and refresh,
it was able to automatically create the new image uh cache
for me.
So I have permissions now in this node in this cluster to
create those permissions and pull through any image that I need.
And again, going back to
uh if we wanted to look at Oregon,
that image also gets replicated here because of the rules.
So even though that node only has you know permissions
and it's creating a a repository in one region,
I get that image everywhere based on that poll.
So my cluster in Oregon can still remain with a read only access to E C R.
So thanks so much for checking it out.
I really hope that this feature helps you out with not
only scaling with uh having better performance from image pulls,
but also just from availability.
So if any upstream images are, are being replicated inside A E C R,
you get a lot more control of that,
a lot more performance and a lot more just guarantees around
that up time again because this isn't a community run repot.
Uh You can get support and,
and guaranteed S L A s with up time for these images so that you
can pull them down and scale with them without having to worry about doing manual
ming and figuring out which images are needed.
So check out the blog post, really hope you enjoy and see you next time.